Thank you so much, Chris.
And it's truly a great honor to have the opportunity to come to this stage twice; I'm extremely grateful.
I have been blown away by this conference, and I want to thank all of you for the many nice comments about what I had to say the other night.
And I say that sincerely, partly because  I need that.
Put yourselves in my position.
I flew on Air Force Two for eight years.
Now I have to take off my shoes or boots to get on an airplane!
I'll tell you one quick story to illustrate what that's been like for me.
It's a true story -- every bit of this is true.
Soon after Tipper and I left the --  White House --  we were driving from our home in Nashville to a little farm we have 50 miles east of Nashville.
Driving ourselves.
I know it sounds like a little thing to you, but --  I looked in the rear-view mirror and all of a sudden it just hit me.
There was no motorcade back there.
You've heard of phantom limb pain?
This was a rented Ford Taurus.
It was dinnertime, and we started looking for a place to eat.
We were on I-40. We got to Exit 238, Lebanon, Tennessee.
We got off the exit, we found a Shoney's restaurant.
Low-cost family restaurant chain, for those of you who don't know it.
We went in and sat down at the booth, and the waitress came over, made a big commotion over Tipper.  She took our order, and then went to the couple in the booth next to us, and she lowered her voice so much, I had to really strain to hear what she was saying.
And she said "Yes, that's former Vice President Al Gore and his wife, Tipper."
And the man said, "He's come down a long way, hasn't he?"
There's been kind of a series of epiphanies.
The very next day, continuing the totally true story, I got on a G-V to fly to Africa to make a speech in Nigeria, in the city of Lagos, on the topic of energy.
And I began the speech by telling them the story of what had just happened the day before in Nashville.
And I told it pretty much the same way I've just shared it with you: Tipper and I were driving ourselves, Shoney's, low-cost family restaurant chain, what the man said -- they laughed.
I gave my speech, then went back out to the airport to fly back home.
I fell asleep on the plane until, during the middle of the night, we landed on the Azores Islands for refueling.
I woke up, they opened the door, I went out to get some fresh air, and I looked, and there was a man running across the runway.
And he was waving a piece of paper, and he was yelling, "Call Washington! Call Washington!"
And I thought to myself, in the middle of the night, in the middle of the Atlantic, what in the world could be wrong in Washington?
Then I remembered it could be a bunch of things.
was that my staff was extremely upset because one of the wire services in Nigeria had already written a story about my speech, and it had already been printed in cities all across the United States of America.
It was printed in Monterey, I checked.
And the story began, "Former Vice President Al Gore announced in Nigeria yesterday," quote: 'My wife Tipper and I have opened a low-cost family restaurant'" -- "'named Shoney's, and we are running it ourselves.'" Before I could get back to U.S. soil, David Letterman and Jay Leno had already started in on -- one of them had me in a big white chef's hat, Tipper was saying, "One more burger with fries!"
Three days later, I got a nice, long, handwritten letter from my friend and partner and colleague Bill Clinton, saying, "Congratulations on the new restaurant, Al!"
We like to celebrate each other's successes in life.
I was going to talk about information ecology.
But I was thinking that, since I plan to make a lifelong habit of coming back to TED, that maybe I could talk about that another time.
Chris Anderson: It's a deal!
Al Gore: I want to focus on what many of you have said you would like me to elaborate on: What can you do about the climate crisis?
I want to start with a couple of -- I'm going to show some new images, and I'm going to recapitulate just four or five.
Now, the slide show. I update the slide show every time I give it.
I add new images, because I learn more about it every time I give it. It's like beach-combing, you know?
Every time the tide comes in and out, you find some more shells.
Just in the last two days, we got the new temperature records in January.
This is just for the United States of America.
Historical average for Januarys is 31 degrees; last month was 39.5 degrees.
Now, I know that you wanted some more bad news about the environment -- I'm kidding.
But these are the recapitulation slides, and then I'm going to go into new material about what you can do.
But I wanted to elaborate on a couple of these.
First of all, this is where we're projected to go with the U.S. contribution to global warming, under business as usual.
Efficiency in end-use electricity and end-use of all energy is the low-hanging fruit.
Efficiency and conservation -- it's not a cost; it's a profit.
The sign is wrong.
It's not negative; it's positive.
These are investments that pay for themselves.
But they are also very effective in deflecting our path.
Cars and trucks -- I talked about that in the slideshow, but I want you to put it in perspective.
It's an easy, visible target of concern -- and it should be -- but there is more global warming pollution that comes from buildings than from cars and trucks.
Cars and trucks are very significant, and we have the lowest standards in the world.
And so we should address that. But it's part of the puzzle.
Other transportation efficiency is as important as cars and trucks.
Renewables at the current levels of technological efficiency can make this much difference.
And with what Vinod, and John Doerr and others, many of you here -- there are a lot of people directly involved in this -- this wedge is going to grow much more rapidly than the current projection shows it.
Carbon Capture and Sequestration -- that's what CCS stands for -- is likely to become the killer app that will enable us to continue to use fossil fuels in a way that is safe.
Not quite there yet.
OK. Now, what can you do?
Reduce emissions in your home.
Most of these expenditures are also profitable.
Insulation, better design. Buy green electricity where you can.
I mentioned automobiles -- buy a hybrid.
Use light rail.
Figure out some of the other options that are much better. It's important.
Be a green consumer.
You have choices with everything you buy, between things that have a harsh effect, or a much less harsh effect on the global climate crisis.
Make a decision to live a carbon-neutral life.
Those of you who are good at branding, I'd love to get your advice and help on how to say this in a way that connects with the most people.
It is easier than you think. It really is.
A lot of us in here have made that decision, and it is really pretty easy.
It means reduce your carbon dioxide emissions with the full range of choices that you make, and then purchase or acquire offsets for the remainder that you have not completely reduced.
And what it means is elaborated at climatecrisis.net.
There is a carbon calculator.
Participant Productions convened -- with my active involvement -- the leading software writers in the world, on this arcane science of carbon calculation, to construct a consumer-friendly carbon calculator.
You can very precisely calculate what your CO2 emissions are, and then you will be given options to reduce.
And by the time the movie comes out in May, this will be updated to 2.0, and we will have click-through purchases of offsets.
Next, consider making your business carbon-neutral.
Again, some of us have done that, and it's not as hard as you think.
Integrate climate solutions into all of your innovations, whether you are from the technology, or entertainment, or design and architecture community.
Invest sustainably. Majora mentioned this.
Listen, if you have invested money with managers who you compensate on the basis of their annual performance, don't ever again complain about quarterly report CEO management.
Over time, people do what you pay them to do.
And if they judge how much they're going to get paid on your capital that they've invested, based on the short-term returns, you're going to get short-term decisions.
A lot more to be said about that.
Become a catalyst of change.
Teach others, learn about it, talk about it.
The movie is a movie version of the slideshow I gave two nights ago, except it's a lot more entertaining.
And it comes out in May.
Many of you here have the opportunity to ensure that a lot of people see it.
Consider sending somebody to Nashville. Pick well.
And I am personally going to train people to give this slideshow -- re-purposed, with some of the personal stories obviously replaced with a generic approach, and it's not just the slides, it's what they mean.
And it's how they link together.
And so I'm going to be conducting a course this summer for a group of people that are nominated by different folks to come and then give it en masse, in communities all across the country, and we're going to update the slideshow for all of them every single week, to keep it right on the cutting edge.
Working with Larry Lessig, it will be, somewhere in that process, posted with tools and limited-use copyrights, so that young people can remix it and do it in their own way.
Where did anybody get the idea that you ought to stay arm's length from politics?
It doesn't mean that if you're a Republican, that I'm trying to convince you to be a Democrat.
We need Republicans as well.
This used to be a bipartisan issue, and I know that in this group it really is.
Become politically active.
Make our democracy work the way it's supposed to work.
Support the idea of capping carbon dioxide emissions -- global warming pollution -- and trading it.
Here's why: as long as the United States is out of the world system, it's not a closed system.
Once it becomes a closed system, with U.S. participation, then everybody who's on a board of directors -- how many people here serve on the board of directors of a corporation?
Once it's a closed system, you will have legal liability if you do not urge your CEO to get the maximum income from reducing and trading the carbon emissions The market will work to solve this problem -- if we can accomplish this.
Help with the mass persuasion campaign that will start this spring.
We have to change the minds of the American people.
Because presently, the politicians do not have permission to do what needs to be done.
And in our modern country, the role of logic and reason no longer includes mediating between wealth and power the way it once did.
It's now repetition of short, hot-button, 30-second, 28-second television ads.
We have to buy a lot of those ads.
Let's re-brand global warming, as many of you have suggested.
I like "climate crisis" instead of "climate collapse," but again, those of you who are good at branding, I need your help on this.
Somebody said the test we're facing now, a scientist told me, is whether the combination of an opposable thumb and a neocortex is a viable combination.
That's really true.
I said the other night, and I'll repeat now: this is not a political issue.
Again, the Republicans here -- this shouldn't be partisan.
You have more influence than some of us who are Democrats do.
This is an opportunity.
Not just this, but connected to the ideas that are here, to bring more coherence to them.
We are one.
Thank you very much, I appreciate it.
In terms of invention, I'd like to tell you the tale of one of my favorite projects.
I think it's one of the most exciting that I'm working on, but I think it's also the simplest.
It's a project that has the potential to make a huge impact around the world.
It addresses one of the biggest health issues on the planet, the number one cause of death in children under five.
Which is ...? Water-borne diseases? Diarrhea? Malnutrition?
No. It's breathing the smoke from indoor cooking fires -- acute respiratory infections caused by this. Can you believe that?
I find this shocking and somewhat appalling.
Can't we make cleaner burning cooking fuels?
Can't we make better stoves?
How is it that this can lead to over two million deaths every year?
I know Bill Joy was talking to you about the wonders of carbon nanotubes, so I'm going to talk to you about the wonders of carbon macro-tubes, which is charcoal.
So this is a picture of rural Haiti. Haiti is now 98 percent deforested.
You'll see scenes like this all over the island.
It leads to all sorts of environmental problems and problems that affect people throughout the nation.
A couple years ago there was severe flooding that led to thousands of deaths -- that's directly attributable to the fact that there are no trees on the hills to stabilize the soil.
So the rains come -- they go down the rivers and the flooding happens.
Now one of the reasons why there are so few trees is this: people need to cook, and they harvest wood and they make charcoal in order to do it.
It's not that people are ignorant to the environmental damage.
They know perfectly well, but they have no other choice.
Fossil fuels are not available, and solar energy doesn't cook the way that they like their food prepared.
And so this is what they do.
You'll find families like this who go out into the forest to find a tree, cut it down and make charcoal out of it.
So not surprisingly, there's a lot of effort that's been done to look at alternative cooking fuels.
About four years ago, I took a team of students down to Haiti and we worked with Peace Corps volunteers there.
This is one such volunteer and this is a device that he had built in the village where he worked.
And the idea was that you could take waste paper; you could compress it and make briquettes that could be used for fuel.
But this device was very slow.
So our engineering students went to work on it and with some very simple changes, they were able to triple the throughput of this device.
So you could imagine they were very excited about it.
And they took the briquettes back to MIT so that they could test them.
And one of the things that they found was they didn't burn.
So it was a little discouraging to the students.
And in fact, if you look closely, right here you can see it says, "US Peace Corps."
As it turns out, there actually wasn't any waste paper in this village.
And while it was a good use of government paperwork for this volunteer to bring it back with him to his village, it was 800 kilometers away.
And so we thought perhaps there might be a better way to come up with an alternative cooking fuel.
What we wanted to do is we wanted to make a fuel that used something that was readily available on the local level.
You see these all over Haiti as well. They're small-scale sugar mills.
And the waste product from them after you extract the juice from the sugarcane is called "bagasse."
It has no other use.
It has no nutritional value, so they don't feed it to the animals.
It just sits in a pile near the sugar mill until eventually they burn it.
What we wanted to do was we wanted to find a way to harness this waste resource and turn it into a fuel that would be something that people could easily cook with, something like charcoal.
So over the next couple of years, students and I worked to develop a process.
So you start with the bagasse, and then you take a very simple kiln that you can make out of a waste fifty five-gallon oil drum.
After some time, after setting it on fire, you seal it to restrict the oxygen that goes into the kiln, and then you end up with this carbonized material here.
However, you can't burn this.
It's too fine and it burns too quickly to be useful for cooking.
So we had to try to find a way to form it into useful briquettes.
And conveniently, one of my students was from Ghana, and he remembered a dish his mom used to make for him called "kokonte," which is a very sticky porridge made out of the cassava root.
And so what we did was we looked, and we found that cassava is indeed grown in Haiti, under the name of "manioc."
In fact, it's grown all over the world -- yucca, tapioca, manioc, cassava, it's all the same thing -- a very starchy root vegetable.
And you can make a very thick, sticky porridge out of it, which you can use to bind together the charcoal briquettes.
So we did this. We went down to Haiti.
These are the graduates of the first Ecole de Charbon, or Charcoal Institute. And these --  That's right. So I'm actually an instructor at MIT as well as CIT.
And these are the briquettes that we made.
Now I'm going to take you to a different continent. This is India and this is the most commonly used cooking fuel in India. It's cow dung.
And more than in Haiti, this produces really smoky fires, and this is where you see the health impacts of cooking with cow dung and biomass as a fuel.
Kids and women are especially affected by it, because they're the ones who are around the cooking fires.
So we wanted to see if we could introduce this charcoal-making technology there.
Well, unfortunately, they didn't have sugarcane and they didn't have cassava, but that didn't stop us.
What we did was we found what were the locally available sources of biomass.
And there was wheat straw and there was rice straw in this area.
And what we could use as a binder was actually small amounts of cow manure, And we did side-by-side tests, and here you can see the charcoal briquettes and here the cow dung.
And you can see that it's a lot cleaner burning of a cooking fuel.
And in fact, it heats the water a lot more quickly.
And so we were very happy, thus far.
But one of the things that we found was when we did side-by-side comparisons with wood charcoal, it didn't burn as long.
And the briquettes crumbled a little bit and we lost energy as they fell apart as they were cooking.
So we wanted to try to find a way to make a stronger briquette so that we could compete with wood charcoal in the markets in Haiti.
So we went back to MIT, we took out the Instron machine and we figured out what sort of forces you needed in order to compress a briquette to the level that you actually are getting improved performance out of it?
And at the same time that we had students in the lab looking at this, we also had community partners in Haiti working to develop the process, to improve it and make it more accessible to people in the villages there.
And after some time, we developed a low-cost press that allows you to produce charcoal, which actually now burns not only -- actually, it burns longer, cleaner than wood charcoal.
So now we're in a situation where we have a product, which is actually better than what you can buy in Haiti in the marketplace, which is a very wonderful place to be.
In Haiti alone, about 30 million trees are cut down every year.
There's a possibility of this being implemented and saving a good portion of those.
In addition, the revenue generated from that charcoal is 260 million dollars.
That's an awful lot for a country like Haiti -- with a population of eight million and an average income of less than 400 dollars.
So this is where we're also moving ahead with our charcoal project.
And one of the things that I think is also interesting, is I have a friend up at UC Berkeley who's been doing risk analysis.
And he's looked at the problem of the health impacts of burning wood versus charcoal.
And he's found that worldwide, you could prevent a million deaths switching from wood to charcoal as a cooking fuel.
That's remarkable, but up until now, there weren't ways to do it without cutting down trees.
But now we have a way that's using an agricultural waste material to create a cooking fuel.
One of the really exciting things, though, is something that came out of the trip that I took to Ghana just last month.
And I think it's the coolest thing, and it's even lower tech than what you just saw, if you can imagine such a thing. Here it is.
So what is this? This is corncobs turned into charcoal.
And the beauty of this is that you don't need to form briquettes -- it comes ready made. This is my $100 laptop, right here.
And actually, like Nick, I brought samples.
So we can pass these around.
They're fully functional, field-tested, ready to roll out.
And I think one of the things which is also remarkable about this technology, is that the technology transfer is so easy. Compared to the sugarcane charcoal, where we have to teach people how to form it into briquettes and you have the extra step of cooking the binder, this comes pre-briquetted.
And this is about the most exciting thing in my life right now, which is perhaps a sad commentary on my life.
But once you see it, like you guys in the front row -- All right, yeah, OK. So anyway --  Here it is. And this is, I think, a perfect example of what Robert Wright was talking about in those non-zero-sum things.
So not only do you have health benefits, you have environmental benefits.
But this is one of the incredibly rare situations where you also have economic benefits.
People can make their own cooking fuel from waste products.
They can generate income from this.
They can save the money that they were going to spend on charcoal and they can produce excess and sell it in the market to people who aren't making their own.
It's really rare that you don't have trade-offs between health and economics, or environment and economics.
So this is a project that I just find extremely exciting and I'm really looking forward to see where it takes us.
So when we talk about, now, the future we will create, one of the things that I think is necessary is to have a very clear vision of the world that we live in.
And now, I don't actually mean the world that we live in.
I mean the world where women spend two to three hours everyday grinding grain for their families to eat.
I mean the world where advanced building materials means cement roofing tiles that are made by hand, and where, when you work 10 hours a day, you're still only earning 60 dollars in a month.
I mean the world where women and children spend 40 billion hours a year fetching water.
That's as if the entire workforce of the state of California worked full time for a year doing nothing but fetching water.
It's a place where, for example, if this were India, in this room, only three of us would have a car.
If this were Afghanistan, only one person in this room would know how the use the Internet.
If this were Zambia -- 300 of you would be farmers, 100 of you would have AIDS or HIV.
And more than half of you would be living on less than a dollar a day.
These are the issues that we need to come up with solutions for.
These are the issues that we need to be training our engineers, our designers, our business people, our entrepreneurs to be facing.
These are the solutions that we need to find.
I have a few areas that I believe are especially important that we address.
One of them is creating technologies to promote micro-finance and micro-enterprise, so that people who are living below the poverty line can find a way to move out -- and that they're not doing it using the same traditional basket making, poultry rearing, etc.
But there are new technologies and new products that they can make on a small scale.
The next thing I believe is that we need to create technologies for poor farmers to add value to their own crops.
And we need to rethink our development strategies, so that we're not promoting educational campaigns to get them to stop being farmers, but rather to stop being poor farmers.
And we need to think about how we can do that effectively.
We need to work with the people in these communities and give them the resources and the tools that they need to solve their own problems. That's the best way to do it.
We shouldn't be doing it from outside.
So we need to create this future, and we need to start doing it now.
Thank you.
Chris Anderson: Thank you, incredible. Stay here. Tell us -- just while we see if someone has a question -- just tell us about one of the other things that you've worked on.
Amy Smith: Some of the other things we're working on are ways to do low-cost water quality testing, so that communities can maintain their own water systems, know when they're working, know when they treat them, etc.
We're also looking at low-cost water-treatment systems.
One of the really exciting things is looking at solar water disinfection and improving the ability to be able to do that.
CA: What's the bottleneck preventing this stuff getting from scale?
Do you need to find entrepreneurs, or venture capitalists, or what do you need to take what you've got and get it to scale?
AS: I think it's large numbers of people moving it forward. It's a difficult thing -- it's a marketplace which is very fragmented and a consumer population with no income.
So you can't use the same models that you use in the United States for making things move forward.
And we're a pretty small staff, which is me.
So, you know, I do what I can with the students.
We have 30 students a year go out into the field and try to implement this and move it forward.
The other thing is you have to do things with a long time frame, as, you know, you can't expect to get something done in a year or two years; you have to be looking five or 10 years ahead.
But I think with the vision to do that, we can move forward.
A public, Dewey long ago observed, is constituted through discussion and debate.
If we are to call the tyranny of assumptions into question, and avoid doxa, the realm of the unquestioned, then we must be willing to subject our own assumptions to debate and discussion. It is in this spirit that I join into a discussion of one of the critical issues of our time, namely, how to mobilize different forms of capital for the project of state building.
To put the assumptions very clearly: capitalism, after 150 years, has become acceptable, and so has democracy.
If we looked in the world of 1945 and looked at the map of capitalist economies and democratic polities, they were the rare exception, not the norm.
The question now, however, is both about which form of capitalism and which type of democratic participation. But we must acknowledge that this moment has brought about a rare consensus of assumptions.
And that provides the ground for a type of action, because consensus of each moment allows us to act. And it is necessary, no matter how fragile or how provisional our consensus, to be able to move forward.
But the majority of the world neither benefits from capitalism nor from democratic systems. Most of the globe experiences the state as repressive, as an organization that is concerned about denial of rights, rather than provision of it.
And in terms of experience of capitalism, there are two aspects that the rest of the globe experiences.
First, extractive industry.
Blood diamonds, smuggled emeralds, timber, that is cut right from under the poorest. Second is technical assistance.
And technical assistance might shock you, but it's the worst form of -- today -- of the ugly face of the developed world to the developing countries. Tens of billions of dollars are supposedly spent on building capacity with people who are paid up to 1,500 dollars a day, who are incapable of thinking creatively, or organically.
Next assumption -- and of course the events of July 7, I express my deep sympathy, and before that, September 11 -- have reminded us we do not live in three different worlds.
We live in one world. But that's easily said.
But we are not dealing with the implications of the one world that we are living in.
this one world cannot be based on huge pockets of exclusion, and then inclusion for some. We must now finally come to think about the premises of a truly global world, in relationship to the regime of rights and responsibilities and accountabilities that are truly global in scope. Otherwise we will be missing this open moment in history, where we have a consensus on both the form of politics and the form of economics.
What is one of these organizations to pick?
We have three critical terms: economy, and the state. I will not deal with those first two, except to say that uncritical transfer of assumptions, from one context to another, can only make for disaster. Economics taught in most of the elite universities are practically useless in my context.
My country is dominated by drug economy and a mafia.
Textbook economics does not work in my context, and I have very few recommendations from anybody as to how to put together a legal economy. The poverty of our knowledge must become the first basis of moving forward, and not imposition of the framework that works on the basis of mathematical modeling, for which I have enormous respect.
My colleagues at Johns Hopkins were among the best.
Second, instead of debating endlessly about what is the structure of the state, why don't we simplify and say, what are a series of functions that the state in the 21st century must perform?
Clare Lockhart and I are writing a book on this; we hope to share that much widely with -- and third is that we could actually construct an index to measure comparatively how well these functions that we would agree on are being performed in different places.
So what are these functions? We propose 10.
And it's legitimate monopoly of means of violence, administrative control, management of public finances, investment in human capital, provision of citizenship rights, provision of infrastructure, management of the tangible and intangible assets of the state through regulation, creation of the market, international agreements, including public borrowing, and then, most importantly, rule of law.
I won't elaborate. I hope the questions will give me an opportunity.
This is a feasible goal, basically because, contrary to widespread assumption, I would argue that we know how to do this.
Who would have imagined that Germany would be either united or democratic today, if you looked at it from the perspective of Oxford of 1943?
But people at Oxford prepared for a democratic Germany and engaged in planning.
And there are lots of other examples.
Now in order to do this -- and this brings this group -- we have to rethink the notion of capital.
The least important form of capital, in this project, is financial capital -- money.
Money is not capital in most of the developing countries.
It's just cash.
Because it lacks the institutional, organizational, managerial forms to turn it into capital. And what is required is a combination of physical capital, institutional capital, human capital -- and security, of course, is critical, but so is information.
Now, the issue that should concern us here -- and that's the challenge that I would like to pose to this group -- is again, it takes 16 years in your countries to produce somebody with a B.S. degree.
It takes 20 years to produce somebody with a Ph.D.
The first challenge is to rethink, fundamentally, the issue of the time.
Do we need to repeat the modalities that we have inherited?
Our educational systems are inherited from the 19th century.
What is it that we need to do fundamentally to re-engage in a project, that capital formation is rapid?
The absolute majority of the world's population are below 20, and they are growing larger and faster. They need different ways of being approached, different ways of being enfranchised, different ways of being skilled.
And that's the first thing.
Second is, you're problem solvers, but you're not engaging your global responsibility.
You've stayed away from the problems of corruption.
You only want clean environments in which to function.
But if you don't think through the problems of corruption, who will? You stay away from design for development.
You're great designers, but your designs are selfish. It's for your own immediate use.
The world in which I operate operates with designs regarding roads, or dams, or provision of electricity that have not been revisited in 60 years.
This is not right. It requires thinking.
But, particularly, what we need more than anything else from this group is your imagination to be brought to bear on problems the way a meme is supposed to work.
As the work on paradigms, long time ago showed -- Thomas Kuhn's work -- it's in the intersection of ideas that new developments -- true breakthroughs -- occur.
And I hope that this group would be able to deal with the issue of state and development and the empowerment of the majority of the world's poor, through this means.
Thank you.
Chris Anderson: So, Ashraf, until recently, you were the finance minister of Afghanistan, a country right at the middle of much of the world's agenda.
Is the country gonna make it?
Will democracy flourish? What scares you most?
Ashraf Ghani: What scares me most is -- is you, lack of your engagement.  You asked me. You know I always give the unconventional answer.
No. But seriously, the issue of Afghanistan first has to be seen as, at least, a 10- to 20-year perspective.
Today the world of globalization is on speed. Time has been compressed.
And space does not exist for most people. But in my world -- you know, when I went back to Afghanistan after 23 years, space had expanded. Every conceivable form of infrastructure had broken down.
I rode -- traveled -- travel between two cities that used to take three hours now took 12.
So the first is when the scale is that, we need to recognize that just the simple things that are infrastructure -- it takes six years to deliver infrastructure.
In our world.
Any meaningful sort of thing.
But the modality of attention, or what is happening today, what's happening tomorrow.
Second is, when a country has been subjected to one of the most immense, brutal forms of exercise of power -- every Afghan sees the sky as a source of fear.
We were bombed practically out of existence.
Then, tens of thousands of people were trained in terrorism -- from all sides.
The United States, Great Britain, joined for instance, Egyptian intelligence service to train thousands of people in resistance and urban terrorism.
How to turn a bicycle into an instrument of terror. How to turn a donkey, a carthorse, anything.
And the Russians, equally.
So, when violence erupts in a country like Afghanistan, it's because of that legacy.
But we have to understand that we've been incredibly lucky.
I mean, I really can't believe how lucky I am here, standing in front of you, speaking.
When I joined as finance minister, I thought that the chances of my living more than three years would not be more than five percent.
Those were the risks. They were worth it.
I think we can make it, and the reason we can make it is because of the people. You see, because, I mean -- I give you one statistic.
91 percent of the men in Afghanistan, 86 percent of the women, listen to at least three radio stations a day.
In terms of their discourse, in terms of their sophistication of knowledge of the world, I think that I would dare say, they're much more sophisticated than rural Americans with college degrees and the bulk of Europeans -- because the world matters to them.
And what is their predominant concern?
Abandonment.
Afghans have become deeply internationalist.
You know, when I went back in December of 2001, I had absolutely no desire to work with the Afghan government because I'd lived as a nationalist.
And I told them -- my people, with the Americans here -- separate. Yes, I have an advisory position with the U.N.
I went through 10 Afghan provinces very rapidly.
And everybody was telling me it was a different world. You know, they engage.
They see engagement, global engagement, as absolutely necessary to the future of the ordinary people.
And the thing that the ordinary Afghan is most concerned with is -- Clare Lockhart is here, so I'll recite a discussion she had with an illiterate woman in Northern Afghanistan.
And that woman said she didn't care whether she had food on her table.
What she worried about was whether there was a plan for the future, where her children could really have a different life.
That gives me hope.
CA: How is Afghanistan going to provide alternative income to the many people who are making their living off the drugs trade?
AG: Certainly. Well, the first is, instead of sending a billion dollars on drug eradication and paying it to a couple of security companies, they should give this hundred billion dollars to 50 of the most critically innovative companies in the world to ask them to create one million jobs.
The key to the drug eradication is jobs.
Look, there's a very little known fact: countries that have a legal average income per capita of 1,000 dollars don't produce drugs.
Second, textile. Trade is the key, not aid.
The U.S. and Europe should give us a zero percent tariff.
The textile industry is incredibly mobile.
If you want us to be able to compete with China and to attract investment, we could probably attract four to six billion dollars quite easily in the textile sector, if there was zero tariffs -- would create the type of job. Cotton does not compete with opium; a t-shirt does. And we need to understand, it's the value chain.
Look, the ordinary Afghan is sick and tired of hearing about microcredit.
It is important, but what the ordinary women and men who engage in micro-production want is global access.
They don't want to sell to the charity bazaars that are only for foreigners -- and the same bloody shirt embroidered time and again.
What we want is a partnership with the Italian design firms.
Yeah, we have the best embroiderers in the world!
Why can't we do what was done with northern Italy?
With the Put Out system? So I think economically, the critical issue really is to now think through.
And what I will say here is that aid doesn't work.
You know, the aid system is broken.
The aid system does not have the knowledge, the vision, the ability.
I'm all for it; after all, I raised a lot of it.
Yeah, to be exact, you know, I managed to persuade the world that they had to give my country 27.5 billion.
They didn't want to give us the money.
CA: And it still didn't work?
AG: No. It's not that it didn't work.
It's that a dollar of private investment, in my judgment, is equal at least to 20 dollars of aid, in terms of the dynamic that it generates.
Second is that one dollar of aid could be 10 cents; it could be 20 cents; or it could be four dollars.
It depends on what form it comes, what degrees of conditionalities are attached to it.
You know, the aid system, at first, was designed to benefit entrepreneurs of the developed countries, not to generate growth in the poor countries.
And this is, again, one of those assumptions -- the way car seats are an assumption that we've inherited in governments, and doors. You would think that the US government would not think that American firms needed subsidizing to function in developing countries, provide advice, but they do. There's an entire weight of history vis-a-vis aid that now needs to be reexamined.
If the goal is to build states that can credibly take care of themselves -- and I'm putting that proposition equally; you know I'm very harsh on my counterparts -- aid must end in each country in a definable period.
And every year there must be progress on mobilization of domestic revenue and generation of the economy.
Unless that kind of compact is entered into, you will not be able to sustain the consensus.
I want to start off by saying, Houston, we have a problem.
We're entering a second generation of no progress in terms of human flight in space. In fact, we've regressed.
We stand a very big chance of losing our ability to inspire our youth to go out and continue this very important thing that we as a species have always done.
And that is, instinctively we've gone out and climbed over difficult places, went to more hostile places, and found out later, maybe to our surprise, that that's the reason we survived.
And I feel very strongly that it's not good enough for us to have generations of kids that think that it's OK to look forward to a better version of a cell phone with a video in it.
They need to look forward to exploration; they need to look forward to colonization; they need to look forward to breakthroughs.
We need to inspire them, because they need to lead us and help us survive in the future.
I'm particularly troubled that what NASA's doing right now with this new Bush doctrine to -- for this next decade and a half -- oh shoot, I screwed up.
We have real specific instructions here not to talk about politics.
What we're looking forward to is --  what we're looking forward to is not only the inspiration of our children, but the current plan right now is not really even allowing the most creative people in this country -- the Boeing's and Lockheed's space engineers -- to go out and take risks and try new stuff.
We're going to go back to the moon ... 50 years later?
And we're going to do it very specifically planned to not learn anything new.
I'm really troubled by that. But anyway that's -- the basis of the thing that I want to share with you today, though, is that right back to where we inspire people who will be our great leaders later.
That's the theme of my next 15 minutes here.
And I think that the inspiration begins when you're very young: three-year-olds, up to 12-, 14-year-olds.
What they look at is the most important thing.
Let's take a snapshot at aviation.
And there was a wonderful little short four-year time period when marvelous things happened.
It started in 1908, when the Wright brothers flew in Paris, and everybody said, "Ooh, hey, I can do that." There's only a few people that have flown in early 1908. In four years, 39 countries had hundreds of airplanes, thousand of pilots. Airplanes were invented by natural selection.
Now you can say that intelligent design designs our airplanes of today, but there was no intelligent design really designing those early airplanes.
There were probably at least 30,000 different things tried, and when they crash and kill the pilot, don't try that again.
The ones that flew and landed OK because there were no trained pilots who had good flying qualities by definition.
So we, by making a whole bunch of attempts, thousands of attempts, in that four-year time period, we invented the concepts of the airplanes that we fly today. And that's why they're so safe, as we gave it a lot of chance to find what's good.
That has not happened at all in space flying.
There's only been two concepts tried -- two by the U.S. and one by the Russians.
Well, who was inspired during that time period?
Aviation Week asked me to make a list of who I thought were the movers and shakers of the first 100 years of aviation.
And I wrote them down and I found out later that every one of them was a little kid in that wonderful renaissance of aviation.
Well, what happened when I was a little kid was -- some pretty heavy stuff too.
The jet age started: the missile age started. Von Braun was on there showing how to go to Mars -- and this was before Sputnik.
And this was at a time when Mars was a hell of a lot more interesting than it is now. We thought there'd be animals there; we knew there were plants there; the colors change, right?
But, you know, NASA screwed that up because they've sent these robots and they've landed it only in the deserts.
If you look at what happened -- this little black line is as fast as man ever flew, and the red line is top-of-the-line military fighters and the blue line is commercial air transport.
You notice here's a big jump when I was a little kid -- and I think that had something to do with giving me the courage to go out and try something that other people weren't having the courage to try.
Well, what did I do when I was a kid?
I didn't do the hotrods and the girls and the dancing and, well, we didn't have drugs in those days. But I did competition model airplanes.
I spent about seven years during the Vietnam War flight-testing airplanes for the Air Force.
And then I went in and I had a lot of fun building airplanes that people could build in their garages.
And some 3,000 of those are flying. Of course, one of them is around the world Voyager. I founded another company in '82, which is my company now.
And we have developed more than one new type of airplane every year since 1982.
And there's a lot of them that I actually can't show you on this chart.
The most impressive airplane ever, I believe, was designed only a dozen years after the first operational jet.
Stayed in service till it was too rusty to fly, taken out of service.
We retreated in '98 back to something that was developed in '56. What?
The most impressive spaceship ever, I believe, was a Grumman Lunar Lander. It was a -- you know, it landed on the moon, take off of the moon, didn't need any maintenance guys -- that's kind of cool.
We've lost that capability. We abandoned it in '72.
This thing was designed three years after Gagarin first flew in space in 1961.
Three years, and we can't do that now. Crazy.
Talk very briefly about innovation cycles, things that grow, have a lot of activity; they die out when they're replaced by something else.
These things tend to happen every 25 years.
40 years long, with an overlap. You can put that statement on all kinds of different technologies. The interesting thing -- by the way, the speed here, excuse me, higher-speed travel is the title of these innovation cycles. There is none here.
These two new airplanes are the same speed as the DC8 that was done in 1958.
Here's the biggie, and that is, you don't have innovation cycles if the government develops and the government uses it.
You know, a good example, of course, is the DARPA net.
Computers were used for artillery first, then IRS.
But when we got it, now you have all the level of activity, all the benefit from it. Private sector has to do it.
Keep that in mind. I put down innovation -- I've looked for innovation cycles in space; I found none.
The very first year, starting when Gagarin went in space, and a few weeks later Alan Shepherd, there were five manned space flights in the world -- the very first year.
In 2003, everyone that the United States sent to space was killed.
There were only three or four flights in 2003.
In 2004, there were only two flights: two Russian Soyuz flights to the international manned station. And I had to fly three in Mojave with my little group of a couple dozen people in order to get to a total of five, which was the number the same year back in 1961.
There is no growth. There's no activity. There's no nothing.
This is a picture here taken from SpaceShipOne.
This is a picture here taken from orbit.
Our goal is to make it so that you can see this picture and really enjoy that.
We know how to do it for sub-orbital flying now, do it safe enough -- at least as safe as the early airlines -- so that can be done.
And I think I want to talk a little bit about why we had the courage to go out and try that as a small company.
Well, first of all, what's going to happen next?
The first industry will be a high volume, a lot of players.
There's another one announced just last week.
And it will be sub-orbital. And the reason it has to be sub-orbital is, there is not solutions for adequate safety to fly the public to orbit. The governments have been doing this -- three governments have been doing this for 45 years, and still four percent of the people that have left the atmosphere have died.
That's -- You don't want to run a business with that kind of a safety record.
It'll be very high volume; we think 100,000 people will fly by 2020.
I can't tell you when this will start, because I don't want my competition to know my schedule.
But I think once it does, we will find solutions, and very quickly, you'll see those resort hotels in orbit.
And that real easy thing to do, which is a swing around the moon so you have this cool view. And that will be really cool.
Because the moon doesn't have an atmosphere -- you can do an elliptical orbit and miss it by 10 feet if you want.
Oh, it's going to be so much fun.
OK. My critics say, "Hey, Rutan's just spending a lot of these billionaires' money for joyrides for billionaires.
What's this? This is not a transportation system; it's just for fun."
And I used to be bothered by that, and then I got to thinking, well, wait a minute. I bought my first Apple computer in 1978 and I bought it because I could say, "I got a computer at my house and you don't.
'What do you use it for?' Come over. It does Frogger." OK.
Not the bank's computer or Lockheed's computer, but the home computer was for games.
For a whole decade it was for fun -- we didn't even know what it was for.
But what happened, the fact that we had this big industry, big development, big improvement and capability and so on, and they get out there in enough homes -- we were ripe for a new invention.
And the inventor is in this audience.
Al Gore invented the Internet and because of that, something that we used for a whole year -- excuse me -- a whole decade for fun, became everything -- our commerce, our research, our communication and, if we let the Google guys think for another couple weekends, we can add a dozen more things to the list.  And it won't be very long before you won't be able to convince kids
that we didn't always have computers in our homes.
So fun is defendable.
OK, I want to show you kind of a busy chart, but in it is my prediction with what's going to happen.
And in it also brings up another point, right here.
There's a group of people that have come forward -- and you don't know all of them -- but the ones that have come forward were inspired as young children, this little three- to 15-year-old age, by us going to orbit and going to the moon here, right in this time period.
Paul Allen, Elan Musk, Richard Branson, Jeff Bezos, the Ansari family, which is now funding the Russians' sub-orbital thing, Bob Bigelow, a private space station, and Carmack.
These people are taking money and putting it in an interesting area, and I think it's a lot better than they put it in an area of a better cell phone or something -- but they're putting it in very -- areas and this will lead us into this kind of capability, and it will lead us into the next really big thing and it will allow us to explore. And I think eventually
it will allow us to colonize and to keep us from going extinct.
They were inspired by big progress. But look at the progress that's going on after that.
There were a couple of examples here.
The military fighters had a -- highest-performance military airplane was the SR71. It went a whole life cycle, got too rusty to fly, and was taken out of service. The Concorde doubled the speed for airline travel.
It went a whole life cycle without competition, took out of service. And we're stuck back here with the same kind of capability for military fighters and commercial airline travel that we had back in the late '50s.
But something is out there to inspire our kids now.
And I'm talking about if you've got a baby now, or if you've got a 10-year-old now.
What's out there is there's something really interesting going to happen here.
Relatively soon, you'll be able to buy a ticket and fly higher and faster than the highest-performance military operational airplane. It's never happened before.
The fact that they have stuck here with this kind of performance has been, well, you know, you win the war in 12 minutes; why do you need something better?
But I think when you guys start buying tickets and flying sub-orbital flights to space, very soon -- wait a minute, what's happening here, we'll have military fighters with sub-orbital capability, and I think very soon this.
But the interesting thing about it is the commercial guys are going to go first.
OK, I look forward to a new "capitalist's space race," let's call it.
You remember the space race in the '60s was for national prestige, because we lost the first two milestones.
We didn't lose them technically. The fact that we had the hardware to put something in orbit when we let Von Braun fly it -- you can argue that's not a technical loss.
Sputnik wasn't a technical loss, but it was a prestige loss.
America -- the world saw America as not being the leader in technology, and that was a very strong thing.
And then we flew Alan Shepherd weeks after Gagarin, not months or decades, or whatever. So we had the capability.
But America lost. We lost. And because of that, we made a big jump to recover it.
Well, again, what's interesting here is we've lost to the Russians on the first couple of milestones already.
You cannot buy a ticket commercially to fly into space in America -- can't do it. You can buy it in Russia.
You can fly with Russian hardware. This is available because a Russian space program is starving, and it's nice for them to get 20 million here and there to take one of the seats.
It's commercial. It can be defined as space tourism. They are also offering a trip to go on this whip around the moon, like Apollo 8 was done.
100 million bucks -- hey, I can go to the moon.
But, you know, would you have thought back in the '60s, when the space race was going on, that the first commercial capitalist-like thing to do to buy a ticket to go to the moon would be in Russian hardware?
And would you have thought, would the Russians have thought, that when they first go to the moon in their developed hardware, the guys inside won't be Russians? Maybe it'll probably be a Japanese or an American billionaire? Well, that's weird: you know, it really is.
But anyway, I think we need to beat them again.
I think what we'll do is we'll see a successful, very successful, private space flight industry. Whether we're first or not really doesn't matter.
The Russians actually flew a supersonic transport before the Concorde.
And then they flew a few cargo flights, and took it out of service.
I think you kind of see the same kind of parallel when the commercial stuff is offered.
OK, we'll talk just a little bit about commercial development for human space flight.
This little thing says here: five times what NASA's doing by 2020. I want to tell you, already there's about 1.5 billion to 1.7 billion investment in private space flight that is not government at all -- already, worldwide. If you read -- if you Google it, you'll find about half of that money, but there's twice of that being committed out there -- not spent yet, but being committed
and planned for the next few years. Hey, that's pretty big.
I'm predicting, though, as profitable as this industry is going to be -- and it certainly is profitable when you fly people at 200,000 dollars on something that you can actually operate at a tenth of that cost, or less -- this is going to be very profitable.
I predict, also, that the investment that will flow into this will be somewhere around half of what the U.S. taxpayer spends for NASA's manned spacecraft work.
And every dollar that flows into that will be spent more efficiently by a factor of 10 to 15. And what that means is before we know it, the progress in human space flight, with no taxpayer dollars, will be at a level of about five times as much as the current NASA budgets for human space flight.
And that is because it's us. It's private industry.
You should never depend on the government to do this sort of stuff -- and we've done it for a long time. The NACA, before NASA, never developed an airliner and never ran an airline.
But NASA is developing the space liner, always has, and runs the only space line, OK. And we've shied away from it because we're afraid of it. But starting back in June of 2004, when I showed that a little group out there actually can do it, can get a start with it, everything changed after that time.
OK, thank you very much.
What I want to talk about is, as background, is the idea that cars are art.
This is actually quite meaningful to me, because car designers tend to be a little bit low on the totem pole -- we don't do coffee table books with just one lamp inside of it -- and cars are thought so much as a product that it's a little bit difficult to get into the aesthetic side under the same sort of terminology that one would discuss art.
And so cars, as art, brings it into an emotional plane -- if you accept that -- that you have to deal with on the same level you would with art with a capital A.
Now at this point you're going to see a picture of Michelangelo.
This is completely different than automobiles.
Automobiles are self-moving things, right? Elevators are automobiles.
And they're not very emotional; they solve a purpose; and certainly automobiles have been around for 100 years and have made our lives functionally a lot better in many ways; they've also been a real pain in the ass, because automobiles are really the thing we have to solve.
We have to solve the pollution, we have to solve the congestion -- but that's not what interests me in this speech.
What interests me in this speech is cars. Automobiles may be what you use, but cars are what we are, in many ways.
And as long as we can solve the problems of automobiles, and I believe we can, with fuel cells or hydrogen, like BMW is really hip on, and lots of other things, then I think we can look past that and try and understand why this hook is in many of us -- of this car-y-ness -- and what that means, what we can learn from it.
That's what I want to get to. Cars are not a suit of clothes; cars are an avatar. Cars are an expansion of yourself: they take your thoughts, your ideas, your emotions, and they multiply it -- your anger, whatever. It's an avatar.
It's a super-waldo that you happen to be inside of, and if you feel sexy, the car is sexy. And if you're full of road rage, you've got a "Chevy: Like a Rock," right?
Cars are a sculpture -- did you know this?
That every car you see out there is sculpted by hand.
Many people think, "Well, it's computers, and it's done by machines and stuff like that."
Well, they reproduce it, but the originals are all done by hand.
It's done by men and women who believe a lot in their craft.
And they put that same kind of tension into the sculpting of a car that you do in a great sculpture that you would go and look at in a museum.
That tension between the need to express, the need to discover, then you put something new into it, and at the same time you have bounds of craftsmanship.
Rules that say, this is how you handle surfaces; this is what control is all about; this is how you show you're a master of your craft.
And that tension, that discovery, that push for something new -- and at the same time, that sense of obligation to the regards of craftsmanship -- that's as strong in cars as it is in anything.
We work in clay, which hasn't changed much since Michelangelo started screwing around with it, and there's a very interesting analogy to that too.
Real quickly -- Michelangelo once said he's there to "discover the figure within," OK?
There we go, the automobile.
That was 100 years right there -- did you catch that?
Between that one there, and that one there, it changed a lot didn't it?
OK, it's not marketing; there's a very interesting car concept here, but the marketing part is not what I want to talk about here.
I want to talk about this.
Why it means you have to wash a car, what is it, that sensuality you have to touch about it? That's the sculpture that goes into it. That sensuality.
And it's done by men and women working just like this, making cars.
Now this little quote about sculpture from Henry Moore, I believe that that "pressure within" that Moore's talking about -- at least when it comes to cars -- comes right back to this idea of the mean.
It's that will to live, that need to survive, to express itself, that comes in a car, and takes over people like me.
And we tell other people, "Do this, do this, do this," until this thing comes alive.
We are completely infected. And beauty can be the result of this infectiousness; it's quite wonderful.
This sculpture is, of course, at the heart of all of it, and it's really what puts the craftsmanship into our cars.
And it's not a whole lot different, really, when they're working like this, or when somebody works like this.
It's that same kind of commitment, that same kind of beauty.
Now, now I get to the point. I want to talk about cars as art.
Art, in the Platonic sense, is truth; it's beauty, and love.
Now this is really where designers in car business diverge from the engineers.
We don't really have a problem talking about love.
We don't have a problem talking about truth or beauty in that sense.
That's what we're searching for -- when we're working our craft, we are really trying to find that truth out there.
We're not trying to find vanity and beauty.
We're trying to find the beauty in the truth.
However, engineers tend to look at things a little bit more Newtonian, instead of this quantum approach.
We're dealing with irrationalisms, and we're dealing with paradoxes that we admit exist, and the engineers tend to look things a little bit more like two and two is four, and if you get 4.0 it's better, and 4.000 is even better.
And that sometimes leads to bit of a divergence in why we're doing what we're doing.
We've pretty much accepted the fact, though, that we are the women in the organization at BMW -- BMW is a very manly type business, -- men, men, men; it's engineers.
And we're kind of the female side to that. That's OK, that's cool. You go off and be manly. We're going to be a little bit more female.
Because what we're interested in is finding form that's more than just a function.
We're interested in finding beauty that's more than just an aesthetic; it's really a truth.
And I think this idea of soul, as being at the heart of great cars, is very applicable. You all know it. You know a car when you've seen it, with soul. You know how strong this is.
Well, this experience of love, and the experience of design, to me, are interchangeable. And now I'm coming to my story.
I discovered something about love and design through a project called Deep Blue.
And first of all, you have to go with me for a second, and say, you know, you could take the word "love" out of a lot of things in our society, put the word "design" in, and it still works, like this quote here, you know. It kind of works, you know?
You can understand that. It works in truisms.
"All is fair in design and war."
Certainly we live in a competitive society.
I think this one here, there's a pop song that really describes Philippe Starck for me, you know, this is like you know, this is like puppy love, you know, this is cool right?
Toothbrush, cool.
It really only gets serious when you look at something like this. OK?
This is one substitution that I believe all of us, in design management, are guilty of.
And this idea that there is more to love, more to design, when it gets down to your neighbor, your other, it can be physical like this, and maybe in the future it will be.
But right now it's in dealing with our own people, our own teams who are doing the creating. So, to my story.
The idea of people-work is what we work with here, and I have to make a bond with my designers when we're creating BMWs.
We have to have a shared intimacy, a shared vision -- that means we have to work as one family; we have to understand ourselves that way.
There's good times; there's interesting times; and there's some stress times too.
You want to do cars, you've got to go outside.
You've got to do cars in the rain; you've got to do cars in the snow.
That's, by the way, is a presentation we made to our board of directors.
We haul their butts out in the snow, too. You want to know cars outside?
Well, you've got to stand outside to do this.
And because these are artists, they have very artistic temperaments.
All right? Now one thing about art is, art is discovery, and art is discovering yourself through your art. Right?
And one thing about cars is we're all a little bit like Pygmalion, we are completely in love with our own creations.
This is one of my favorite paintings, it really describes our relationship with cars.
This is sick beyond belief.
But because of this, the intimacy with which we work together as a team takes on a new dimension, a new meaning.
We have a shared center; we have a shared focus -- that car stays at the middle of all our relationships.
And it's my job, in the competitive process, to narrow this down.
I heard today about Joseph's death genes that have to go in and kill cell reproduction.
You know, that's what I have to do sometimes.
We start out with 10 cars; we narrow it down to five cars, down to three cars, down to two cars, down to one car, and I'm in the middle of that killing, basically.
Someone's love, someone's baby.
This is very difficult, and you have to have a bond with your team that permits you to do this, because their life is wrapped up in that too.
They've got that gene infected in them as well, and they want that to live, more than anything else.
Well, this project, Deep Blue, put me in contact with my team in a way that I never expected, and I want to pass it on to you, because I want you to reflect on this, perhaps in your own relationships.
We wanted to a do a car which was a complete leap of faith for BMW.
We wanted to do a team which was so removed from the way we'd done it, that I only had a phone number that connected me to them.
So, what we did was: instead of having a staff of artists that are just your wrist, we decided to free up a team of creative designers and engineers to find out what's the successor to the SUV phenomenon in America.
This is 1996 we did this project. And so we sent them off with this team name, Deep Blue. Now many people know Deep Blue from IBM -- we actually stole it from them because we figured if anybody read our faxes they'd think we're talking about computers.
It turned out it was quite clever because Deep Blue, in a company like BMW, has a hook -- "Deep Blue," wow, cool name.
So people get wrapped up in it. And we took a team of designers, and we sent them off to America. And we gave them a budget, what we thought was a set of deliverables, a timetable, and nothing else.
Like I said, I just had a phone number that connected me to them.
And a group of engineers worked in Germany, and the idea was they would work separately on this problem of what's the successor to the SUV.
They would come together, compare notes. Then they would work apart, come together, and they would produce together a monumental set of diverse opinions that didn't pollute each other's ideas -- but at the same time came together and resolved the problems.
Hopefully, really understand the customer at its heart, where the customer is, live with them in America. So -- sent the team off, and actually something different happened. They went other places.
They disappeared, quite honestly, and all I got was postcards.
Now, I got some postcards of these guys in Las Vegas, and I got some postcards of these guys in the Grand Canyon, and I got these postcards of Niagara Falls, and pretty soon they're in New York, and I don't know where else.
And I'm telling myself, "This is going to be a great car, they're doing research that I've never even thought about before."
Right? And they decided that instead of, like, having a studio, and six or seven apartments, it was cheaper to rent Elizabeth Taylor's ex-house in Malibu.
And -- at least they told me it was her house, I guess it was at one time, she had a party there or something.
But anyway, this was the house, and they all lived there.
Now this is 24/7 living, half-a-dozen people who'd left their -- some had left their wives behind and families behind, and they literally lived in this house for the entire six months the project was in America, but the first three months were the most intensive.
And one of the young women in the project, she was a fantastic lady, she actually built her room in the bathroom.
The bathroom was so big, she built the bed over the bathtub -- it's quite fascinating.
On the other hand, I didn't know anything about this. OK?
Nothing. This is all going on, and all I'm getting is postcards of these guys in Las Vegas, or whatever, saying, "Don't worry Chris, this is really going to be good." OK?
So my concept of what a design studio was probably -- I wasn't up to speed on where these guys were.
However, the engineers back in Munich had taken on this kind of Newtonian solution, and they were trying to find how many cup holders can dance on the head of a pin, and, you know, these really serious questions that are confronting the modern consumer.
And one was hoping that these two teams would get together, and this collusion of incredible creativity, under these incredible surroundings, and these incredibly stressed-out engineers, would create some incredible solutions.
Well, what I didn't know was, and what we found out was -- these guys, they can't even like talk to each other under those conditions.
You get a divergence of Newtonian and quantum thinking at that point, you have a split in your dialog that is so deep, and so far, that they cannot bring this together at all.
And so we had our first meeting, after three months, in Tiburon, which is just up the road from here -- you know Tiburon?
And the idea was after the first three months of this independent research they would present it all to Dr. Goschel -- who is now my boss, and at that time he was co-mentor on the project -- and they would present their results.
We would see where we were going, we would see the first indication of what could be the successive phenomenon to the SUV in America.
And so I had these ideas in my head, that this is going to be great.
I mean, I'm going to see so much work, it's so intense -- I know probably Las Vegas meant a lot about it, and I'm not really sure where the Grand Canyon came in either -- but somehow all this is going to come together, and I'm going to see some really great product.
So we went to Tiburon, after three months, and the team had gotten together the week before, many days ahead of time.
The engineers flew over, and designers got together with them, and they put their presentation together.
Well, it turns out that the engineers hadn't done anything.
And they hadn't done anything because -- kind of, like in car business, engineers are there to solve problems, and we were asking them to create a problem.
And the engineers were waiting for the designers to say, "This is the problem that we've created, now help us solve it."
And they couldn't talk about it. So what happened was, the engineers showed up with nothing.
And the engineers told the designers, "If you go in with all your stuff, we'll walk out, we'll walk right out of the project."
So I didn't know any of this, and we got a presentation that had an agenda, looked like this.
There was a whole lot of dialog.
We spent four hours being told all about vocabulary that needs to be built between engineers and designers.
And here I'm expecting at any moment, "OK, they're going to turn the page, and I'm going to see the cars, I'm going to see the sketches, I'm going to see maybe some idea of where it's going."
Dialog kept on going, with mental maps of words, and pretty soon it was becoming obvious that instead of being dazzled with brilliance, I was seriously being baffled with bullshit.
And if you can imagine what this is like, to have these months of postcard indication of how great this team is working, and they're out there spending all this money, and they're learning, and they're doing all this stuff.
I went fucking ballistic, right? I went nuts.
You can probably remember Tiburon, it used to look like this.
After four hours of this, I stood up, and I took this team apart.
I screamed at them, I yelled at them, "What the hell are you doing?
You're letting me down, you're my designers, you're supposed to be the creative ones, what the hell is going on around here?"
It was probably one of my better tirades, I have some good ones, but this was probably one of my better ones. And I went into these people; how could they take BMW's money, how could they have a holiday for three months and produce nothing, nothing?
Because of course they didn't tell us that they had three station wagons full of drawings, model concepts, pictures -- everything I wanted, they'd locked up in the cars, because they had shown solidarity with the engineers -- and they'd decided not to show me anything, in order to give the chance for problem solving a chance to start, because they hadn't realized, of course, that they couldn't do problem creating.
So we went to lunch --  And I've got to tell you, this was one seriously quiet lunch.
The engineers all sat at one end of the table, the designers and I sat at the other end of the table, really quiet.
And I was just fucking furious, furious. OK?
Probably because they had all the fun and I didn't, you know.
That's what you get furious about right?
And somebody asked me about Catherine, my wife, you know, did she fly out with me or something?
I said, "No," and it triggered a set of thoughts about my wife.
And I recalled that when Catherine and I were married, the priest gave a very nice sermon, and he said something very important.
He said, "Love is not selfish," he said, "Love does not mean counting how many times I say, 'I love you.' It doesn't mean you had sex this many times this month, and it's two times less than last month, so that means you don't love me as much.
Love is not selfish." And I thought about this, and I thought, "You know, I'm not showing love here. I'm seriously not showing love.
I'm in the air, I'm in the air without trust.
This cannot be. This cannot be that I'm expecting a certain number of sketches, and to me that's my quantification method for qualifying a team.
This cannot be."
So I told them this story. I said, "Guys, I'm thinking about something here, this isn't right. I can't have a relationship with you guys based on a premise that is a quantifiable one.
Based on a dictate premise that says, 'I'm a boss, you do what I say, without trust.'" I said "This can't be."
Actually, we all broke down into tears, to be quite honest about it, because they still could not tell me how much frustration they had built up inside of them, not being able to show me what I wanted, and merely having to ask me to trust them that it would come.
And I think we felt much closer that day, we cut a lot of strings that didn't need to be there, and we forged the concept for what real team and creativity is all about.
We put the car back at the center of our thoughts, and we put love, I think, truly back into the center of the process.
By the way, that team went on to create six different concepts for the next model of what would be the proposal for the next generation after SUVs in America.
One of those was the idea of a crossover coupes -- you see it downstairs, the X Coupe -- they had a lot of fun with that.
It was the rendition of our motorcycle, the GS, as Carl Magnusson says, "brute-iful," as the idea of what could be a motorcycle, if you add two more wheels.
And so, in conclusion, my lesson that I wanted to pass on to you, was this one here. I'm also going to steal a little quote out of "Little Prince."
There's a lot to be said about trust and love, if you know that those two words are synonymous for design.
I had a very, very meaningful relationship with my team that day, and it's stayed that way ever since.
And I hope that you too find that there's more to design, and more towards the art of the design, than doing it yourself.
It's true that the trust and the love, that makes it worthwhile.
Thanks so much.
At the break, I was asked by several people about my comments about the aging debate.
And this will be my only comment on it.
And that is, I understand that optimists greatly outlive pessimists.
What I'm going to tell you about in my 18 minutes is how we're about to switch from reading the genetic code to the first stages of beginning to write the code ourselves.
It's only 10 years ago this month when we published the first sequence of a free-living organism, that of haemophilus influenzae.
That took a genome project from 13 years down to four months.
We can now do that same genome project in the order of two to eight hours.
So in the last decade, a large number of genomes have been added: most human pathogens, a couple of plants, several insects and several mammals, including the human genome.
Genomics at this stage of the thinking from a little over 10 years ago was, by the end of this year, we might have between three and five genomes sequenced; it's on the order of several hundred.
We just got a grant from the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation to sequence 130 genomes this year, as a side project from environmental organisms.
So the rate of reading the genetic code has changed.
But as we look, what's out there, we've barely scratched the surface on what is available on this planet.
Most people don't realize it, because they're invisible, but microbes make up about a half of the Earth's biomass, whereas all animals only make up about one one-thousandth of all the biomass.
And maybe it's something that people in Oxford don't do very often, but if you ever make it to the sea, and you swallow a mouthful of seawater, keep in mind that each milliliter has about a million bacteria and on the order of 10 million viruses.
Less than 5,000 microbial species have been characterized as of two years ago, and so we decided to do something about it.
And we started the Sorcerer II Expedition, where we were, as with great oceanographic expeditions, trying to sample the ocean every 200 miles.
We started in Bermuda for our test project, then moved up to Halifax, working down the U.S. East Coast, the Caribbean Sea, the Panama Canal, through to the Galapagos, then across the Pacific, and we're in the process now of working our way across the Indian Ocean.
It's very tough duty; we're doing this on a sailing vessel, in part to help excite young people about going into science.
The experiments are incredibly simple.
We just take seawater and we filter it, and we collect different size organisms on different filters, and then take their DNA back to our lab in Rockville, where we can sequence a hundred million letters of the genetic code every 24 hours.
And with doing this, we've made some amazing discoveries.
For example, it was thought that the visual pigments that are in our eyes -- there was only one or two organisms in the environment that had these same pigments.
It turns out, almost every species in the upper parts of the ocean in warm parts of the world have these same photoreceptors, and use sunlight as the source of their energy and communication.
From one site, from one barrel of seawater, we discovered 1.3 million new genes and as many as 50,000 new species.
We've extended this to the air now with a grant from the Sloan Foundation.
We're measuring how many viruses and bacteria all of us are breathing in and out every day, particularly on airplanes or closed auditoriums.
We filter through some simple apparatuses; we collect on the order of a billion microbes from just a day filtering on top of a building in New York City.
And we're in the process of sequencing all that at the present time.
Just on the data collection side, just where we are through the Galapagos, we're finding that almost every 200 miles, we see tremendous diversity in the samples in the ocean.
Some of these make logical sense, in terms of different temperature gradients.
So this is a satellite photograph based on temperatures -- red being warm, blue being cold -- and we found there's a tremendous difference between the warm water samples and the cold water samples, in terms of abundant species.
The other thing that surprised us quite a bit is these photoreceptors detect different wavelengths of light, and we can predict that based on their amino acid sequence.
And these vary tremendously from region to region.
Maybe not surprisingly, in the deep ocean, where it's mostly blue, the photoreceptors tend to see blue light.
When there's a lot of chlorophyll around, they see a lot of green light.
But they vary even more, possibly moving towards infrared and ultraviolet in the extremes.
Just to try and get an assessment of what our gene repertoire was, we assembled all the data -- including all of ours thus far from the expedition, which represents more than half of all the gene data on the planet -- and it totaled around 29 million genes.
And we tried to put these into gene families to see what these discoveries are: Are we just discovering new members of known families, or are we discovering new families?
And it turns out we have about 50,000 major gene families, but every new sample we take in the environment adds in a linear fashion to these new families.
So we're at the earliest stages of discovery about basic genes, components and life on this planet.
When we look at the so-called evolutionary tree, we're up on the upper right-hand corner with the animals.
Of those roughly 29 million genes, we only have around 24,000 in our genome.
And if you take all animals together, we probably share less than 30,000 and probably maybe a dozen or more thousand different gene families.
I view that these genes are now not only the design components of evolution.
And we think in a gene-centric view -- maybe going back to Richard Dawkins' ideas -- than in a genome-centric view, which are different constructs of these gene components.
Synthetic DNA, the ability to synthesize DNA, has changed at sort of the same pace that DNA sequencing has over the last decade or two, and is getting very rapid and very cheap.
Our first thought about synthetic genomics came when we sequenced the second genome back in 1995, and that from mycoplasma genitalium.
And we have really nice T-shirts that say, you know, "I heart my genitalium."
This is actually just a microorganism.
But it has roughly 500 genes.
Haemophilus had 1,800 genes.
And we simply asked the question, if one species needs 800, another 500, is there a smaller set of genes that might comprise a minimal operating system?
So we started doing transposon mutagenesis.
Transposons are just small pieces of DNA that randomly insert in the genetic code.
And if they insert in the middle of the gene, they disrupt its function.
So we made a map of all the genes that could take transposon insertions and we called those "non-essential genes."
But it turns out the environment is very critical for this, and you can only define an essential or non-essential gene based on exactly what's in the environment.
We also tried to take a more directly intellectual approach with the genomes of 13 related organisms, and we tried to compare all of those, to see what they had in common.
And we got these overlapping circles. And we found only 173 genes common to all 13 organisms.
The pool expanded a little bit if we ignored one intracellular parasite; it expanded even more when we looked at core sets of genes of around 310 or so.
So we think that we can expand or contract genomes, depending on your point of view here, to maybe 300 to 400 genes from the minimal of 500.
The only way to prove these ideas was to construct an artificial chromosome with those genes in them, and we had to do this in a cassette-based fashion.
We found that synthesizing accurate DNA in large pieces was extremely difficult.
Ham Smith and Clyde Hutchison, my colleagues on this, developed an exciting new method that allowed us to synthesize a 5,000-base pair virus in only a two-week period that was 100 percent accurate, in terms of its sequence and its biology.
It was a quite exciting experiment -- when we just took the synthetic piece of DNA, injected it in the bacteria and all of a sudden, that DNA started driving the production of the virus particles that turned around and then killed the bacteria.
This was not the first synthetic virus -- a polio virus had been made a year before -- but it was only one ten-thousandth as active and it took three years to do.
This is a cartoon of the structure of phi X 174.
This is a case where the software now builds its own hardware, and that's the notions that we have with biology.
People immediately jump to concerns about biological warfare, and I had recent testimony before a Senate committee, and a special committee the U.S. government has set up to review this area.
And I think it's important to keep reality in mind, versus what happens with people's imaginations.
Basically, any virus that's been sequenced today -- that genome can be made.
And people immediately freak out about things about Ebola or smallpox, but the DNA from this organism is not infective.
So even if somebody made the smallpox genome, that DNA itself would not cause infections.
The real concern that security departments have is designer viruses.
And there's only two countries, the U.S. and the former Soviet Union, that had major efforts on trying to create biological warfare agents.
If that research is truly discontinued, there should be very little activity on the know-how to make designer viruses in the future.
I think single-cell organisms are possible within two years.
And possibly eukaryotic cells, those that we have, are possible within a decade.
So we're now making several dozen different constructs, because we can vary the cassettes and the genes that go into this artificial chromosome.
The key is, how do you put all of the others?
We start with these fragments, and then we have a homologous recombination system that reassembles those into a chromosome.
This is derived from an organism, deinococcus radiodurans, that can take three million rads of radiation and not be killed.
It reassembles its genome after this radiation burst in about 12 to 24 hours, after its chromosomes are literally blown apart.
This organism is ubiquitous on the planet, and exists perhaps now in outer space due to all our travel there.
This is a glass beaker after about half a million rads of radiation.
The glass started to burn and crack, while the microbes sitting in the bottom just got happier and happier.
Here's an actual picture of what happens: the top of this shows the genome after 1.7 million rads of radiation.
The chromosome is literally blown apart.
And here's that same DNA automatically reassembled 24 hours later.
It's truly stunning that these organisms can do that, and we probably have thousands, if not tens of thousands, of different species on this planet that are capable of doing that.
After these genomes are synthesized, the first step is just transplanting them into a cell without a genome.
So we think synthetic cells are going to have tremendous potential, not only for understanding the basis of biology but for hopefully environmental and society issues.
For example, from the third organism we sequenced, Methanococcus jannaschii -- it lives in boiling water temperatures; its energy source is hydrogen and all its carbon comes from CO2 it captures back from the environment.
So we know lots of different pathways, thousands of different organisms now that live off of CO2, and can capture that back.
So instead of using carbon from oil for synthetic processes, we have the chance of using carbon and capturing it back from the atmosphere, converting that into biopolymers or other products.
We have one organism that lives off of carbon monoxide, and we use as a reducing power to split water to produce hydrogen and oxygen.
Also, there's numerous pathways that can be engineered metabolizing methane.
And DuPont has a major program with Statoil in Norway to capture and convert the methane from the gas fields there into useful products.
Within a short while, I think there's going to be a new field called "Combinatorial Genomics," because with these new synthesis capabilities, these vast gene array repertoires and the homologous recombination, we think we can design a robot to make maybe a million different chromosomes a day.
And therefore, as with all biology, you get selection through screening, whether you're screening for hydrogen production, or chemical production, or just viability.
To understand the role of these genes We're trying to modify photosynthesis to produce hydrogen directly from sunlight.
Photosynthesis is modulated by oxygen, and we have an oxygen-insensitive hydrogenase that we think will totally change this process.
We're also combining cellulases, the enzymes that break down complex sugars into simple sugars and fermentation in the same cell for producing ethanol.
Pharmaceutical production is already under way in major laboratories using microbes.
The chemistry from compounds in the environment is orders of magnitude more complex than our best chemists can produce.
I think future engineered species could be the source of food, hopefully a source of energy, environmental remediation and perhaps replacing the petrochemical industry.
Let me just close with ethical and policy studies.
We delayed the start of our experiments in 1999 until we completed a year-and-a-half bioethical review as to whether we should try and make an artificial species.
Every major religion participated in this.
It was actually a very strange study, because the various religious leaders were using their scriptures as law books, and they couldn't find anything in them prohibiting making life, so it must be OK. The only ultimate concerns were biological warfare aspects of this, but gave us the go ahead to start these experiments for the reasons we were doing them.
Right now the Sloan Foundation has just funded a multi-institutional study on this, to work out what the risk and benefits to society are, and the rules that scientific teams such as my own should be using in this area, and we're trying to set good examples as we go forward.
These are complex issues.
Except for the threat of bio-terrorism, they're very simple issues in terms of, can we design things to produce clean energy, what developing countries can do and provide through various simple processes.
Thank you very much.
Hello voice mail, my old friend.
I've called for tech support again.
I ignored my boss's warning. I called on a Monday morning.
Now it's evening, and my dinner first grew cold, and then grew mold.
I'm still on hold. I'm listening to the sounds of silence.
I don't think you understand. I think your phone lines are unmanned.
I punched every touch tone I was told, but I've still spent 18 hours on hold.
It's not enough your software crashed my Mac, and it constantly hangs and bombs -- it erased my ROMs!
Now the Mac makes the sounds of silence.
In my dreams I fantasize of wreaking vengeance on you guys.
Say your motorcycle crashes.
Blood comes gushing from your gashes.
With your fading strength, you call 9-1-1 and you pray for a trained MD. But you get me.
And you listen to the sounds of silence.
Thank you. Good evening and welcome to: "Spot the TED Presenter Who Used to Be a Broadway Accompanist."
When I was offered the Times column six years ago, the deal was like this: you'll be sent the coolest, hottest, slickest new gadgets.
Every week, it'll arrive at your door.
You get to try them out, play with them, evaluate them until the novelty wears out, before you have to send them back, and you'll get paid for it. You can think about it, if you want.
So, I've always been a technology nut, and I absolutely love it.
The job, though, came with one small downside, and that is, they intended to publish my email address at the end of every column.
And what I've noticed is -- first of all, you get an incredible amount of email.
If you ever are feeling lonely, get a New York Times column, because you will get hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of emails.
And the email I'm getting a lot today is about frustration.
People are feeling like things -- Ok, I just had an alarm come up on my screen. Lucky you can't see it.
People are feeling overwhelmed. They're feeling like it's too much technology, too fast.
It may be good technology, but I feel like there's not enough of a support structure.
There's not enough help.
There's not enough thought put into the design of it to make it easy and enjoyable to use.
One time I wrote a column about my efforts to reach Dell Technical Support, and within 12 hours, there were 700 messages from readers on the feedback boards on the Times website, from users saying, ""Me too, and here's my tale of woe."
I call it "software rage."
And man, let me tell you, whoever figures out how to make money off of this frustration will -- Oh, how did that get up there? Just kidding.
Ok, so why is the problem accelerating? And part of the problem is, ironically, because the industry has put so much thought into making things easier to use.
I'll show you what I mean.
This is what the computer interface used to look like, DOS.
Over the years, it's gotten easier to use.
This is the original Mac operating system.
Reagan was President. Madonna was still a brunette.
And the entire operating system -- this is the good part -- the entire operating system fit in 211 k.
You couldn't put the Mac OS X logo in 211 k!
So the irony is, that as these things became easier to use, a less technical, broader audience was coming into contact with this equipment for the first time.
I once had the distinct privilege of sitting in on the Apple call center for a day.
The guy had a duplicate headset for me to listen to.
And the calls that -- you know how they say, "Your call may be recorded for quality assurance?"
Uh-uh. Your call may be recorded so that they can collect the funniest dumb user stories and pass them around on a CD.
Which they do.
And I have a copy.
It's in your gift bag. No, no.
With your voices on it!
So, some of the stories are just so classic, and yet so understandable.
A woman called Apple to complain that her mouse was squeaking.
Making a squeaking noise.
And the technician said, "Well, ma'am, what do you mean your mouse is squeaking?"
She says, "All I can tell you is that it squeaks louder, the faster I move it across the screen."
And the technician's like, "Ma'am, you've got the mouse up against the screen?"
She goes, "Well, the message said, 'Click here to continue.'"  Well, if you like that one -- how much time have we got?
Another one, a guy called -- this is absolutely true -- his computer had crashed, and he told the technician he couldn't restart it, no matter how many times he typed "11."
And the technician said, "What? Why are you typing 11?"
He said, "The message says, 'Error Type 11.'"  So, we must admit that some of the blame falls squarely at the feet of the users.
But why is the technical overload crisis, the complexity crisis, accelerating now?
In the hardware world, it's because we the consumers want everything to be smaller, smaller, smaller.
but our fingers are essentially staying the same size.
So it gets to be more and more of a challenge.
Software is subject to another primal force: the mandate to release more and more versions.
When you buy a piece of software, it's not like buying a vase or a candy bar, where you own it.
and every year, they say, "We've added more features, and we'll sell it to you for $99."
I know one guy who's spent $4,000 just on Photoshop over the years.
And software companies make 35 percent of their revenue from just these software upgrades.
I call it the Software Upgrade Paradox -- which is that if you improve a piece of software enough times, you eventually ruin it.
I mean, Microsoft Word was last just a word processor in, you know, the Eisenhower administration.
But what's the alternative? Microsoft actually did this experiment.
They said, "Well, wait a minute. Everyone complains that we're adding so many features.
Let's create a word processor that's just a word processor: Simple, pure; does not do web pages, is not a database."
And it came out, and it was called Microsoft Write.
And none of you are nodding in acknowledgment, because it died.
It tanked. No one ever bought it.
I call this the Sport Utility Principle.
People like to surround themselves with unnecessary power, right?
They don't need the database and the website, but they're like, "Well, I'll upgrade, because, I might, you know, I might need that someday."
So the problem is: as you add more features, where are they going to go?
Where are you going to stick them? You only have so many design tools.
You can do buttons, you can do sliders, pop-up menus, sub-menus.
But if you're not careful about how you choose, you wind up with this.
This is an un-retouched -- this is not a joke -- un-retouched photo of Microsoft Word, the copy that you have, with all the toolbars open.
You've obviously never opened all the toolbars, but all you have to type in is this little, teeny window down here.
And we've arrived at the age of interface matrices, where there are so many features and options, you have to do two dimensions, you know: a vertical and a horizontal. You guys all complain about how Microsoft Word is always bulleting your lists and underlining your links automatically.
The off switch is in there somewhere.
I'm telling you -- it's there.
Part of the art of designing a simple, good interface, is knowing when to use which one of these features.
So, here is the log-off dialogue box for Windows 2000.
There are only four choices, so why are they in a pop-up menu?
It's not like the rest of the screen is so full of other components that you need to collapse the choices.
They could have put them all out in view.
Here's Apple's take on the exact same dialogue box.
Thank you -- yes, I designed the dialogue box. No, no.
Already, we can see that Apple and Microsoft have a severely divergent approach to software design.
Microsoft's approach to simplicity tends to be: let's break it down; let's just make it more steps.
There are these "wizards" everywhere.
And you know, there's a new version of Windows coming out this fall.
If they continue at this pace, there's absolutely no telling where they might wind up.
"Welcome to the Type a Word Wizard." Ok, I'll bite. Let's click "Next" to continue.
From the drop-down menu, choose the first letter you want to type. Ok.
So there is a limit that we don't want to cross. So what is the answer?
How do you pack in all these features in a simple, intelligent way?
I believe in consistency, when possible, real-world equivalents, trash can folder, when possible, label things, mostly.
But I beg of the designers here to break all those rules if they violate the biggest rule of all, which is intelligence. Now what do I mean by that?
I'm going to give you some examples where intelligence makes something not consistent, but it's better.
If you are buying something on the web, you're supposed to put in your address, and you're supposed to choose what country you're from, ok?
There are 200 countries in the world. We like to think of the Internet as a global village.
I'm sorry; it's not one yet.
It's mainly like, the United States, Europe, and Japan.
So why is "United States" in the "U"s?
You have to scroll, like, seven screensful to get to it.
Now, it would be inconsistent to put "United States" first, but it would be intelligent. This one's been touched on before, but why in God's name do you shut down a Windows PC by clicking a button called "Start?"
Here's another pet one of mine: you have a printer.
Most of the time, you want to print one copy of your document, in page order, on that printer.
So why in God's name do you see this every time you print?
It's like a 747 shuttle cockpit.
And one of the buttons at the bottom, you'll notice, is not "Print."
Now, I'm not saying that Apple is the only company who has embraced the cult of simplicity.
Palm is also, especially in the old days, wonderful about this.
I actually got to speak to Palm when they were flying high in the '90s, and after the talk, I met one of the employees.
He says, "Nice talk." And I said, "Thank you. What do you do here?"
He said, "I'm a tap counter." I'm like, "You're a what?"
He goes, "Well Jeff Hawkins, the CEO, says, 'If any task on the Palm Pilot takes more than three taps of the stylus, it's too long, and it has to be redesigned.' So I'm the tap counter."
So, I'm going to show you an example of a company that does not have a tap counter.
This is Microsoft Word.
Ok, when you want to create a new blank document in Word -- it could happen.
You go up to the "File" menu and you choose "New."
Now, what happens when you choose "New?" Do you get a new blank document?
You do not.
On the opposite side of the monitor, a task bar appears, and somewhere in those links -- by the way, not at the top -- somewhere in those links is a button that makes you a new document.
Ok, so that is a company not counting taps.
You know, I don't want to just stand here and make fun of Microsoft ...
Yes, I do.
The Bill Gates song!
I've been a geek forever and I wrote the very first DOS.
I put my software and IBM together; I got profit and they got the loss.
I write the code that makes the whole world run.
I'm getting royalties from everyone.
Sometimes it's garbage, but the press is snowed.
You buy the box; I'll sell the code.
Every software company is doing Microsoft's R&amp;D.
You can't keep a good idea down these days.
Even Windows is a hack. We're kind of based loosely on the Mac.
So it's big, so it's slow. You've got nowhere to go. I'm not doing this for praise.
I write the code that fits the world today.
Big mediocrity in every way.
We've entered planet domination mode.
You'll have no choice; you'll buy my code.
I am Bill Gates and I write the code.
But actually, I believe there are really two Microsofts.
There's the old one, responsible for Windows and Office.
They're dying to throw the whole thing out and start fresh, but they can't.
They're locked in, because so many add-ons and other company stuff locks into the old 1982 chassis.
But there's also a new Microsoft, that's really doing good, simple interface designs.
I liked the Media Center PC.
I liked the Microsoft SPOT Watch.
The Wireless Watch flopped miserably in the market, but it wasn't because it wasn't simply and beautifully designed.
But let's put it this way: would you pay $10 a month to have a watch that has to be recharged every night like your cell phone, and stops working when you leave your area code?
So, the signs might indicate that the complexity crunch is only going to get worse.
So is there any hope?
The screens are getting smaller, people are illuminating, putting manuals in the boxes, It's funny -- when Steve Jobs came back to Apple in 1997, after 12 years away, it was the MacWorld Expo -- he came to the stage in that black turtleneck and jeans, and he sort of did this. The crowd went wild, but I had just seen -- I'm like, where have I seen this before? I had just seen the movie "Evita" --
with Madonna, and I'm like, you know what? I've got to do one about Steve Jobs.
It won't be easy. You'll think I'm strange.
When I try to explain why I'm back, after telling the press Apple's future is black.
You won't believe me.
All that you see is a kid in his teens who started out in a garage with only a buddy named Woz.
You try rhyming with garage!
Don't cry for me, Cupertino.
The truth is, I never left you.
I know the ropes now, know what the tricks are.
I made a fortune over at Pixar.
Don't cry for me, Cupertino. I've still got the drive and vision.
I still wear sandals in any weather. It's just that these days, they're Gucci leather.
Thank you. So Steve Jobs had always believed in simplicity and elegance and beauty.
And the truth is, for years I was a little depressed, because Americans obviously did not value it, because the Mac had three percent market share, Windows had 95 percent market share -- people did not think it was worth putting a price on it.
So I was a little depressed. And then I heard Al Gore's talk, and I realized I didn't know the meaning of depressed.
But it turns out I was wrong, right? Because the iPod came out, and it violated every bit of common wisdom.
Other products cost less; other products had more features, they had voice recorders and FM transmitters.
The other products were backed by Microsoft, with an open standard, not Apple's propriety standard.
But the iPod won -- this is the one they wanted.
The lesson was: simplicity sells.
And there are signs that the industry is getting the message.
This is a little company that's done very well with simplicity and elegance.
The Sonos thing -- it's catching on.
I've got just a couple examples.
Physically, a really cool, elegant thinking coming along lately.
When you have a digital camera, how do you get the pictures back to your computer?
Well, you either haul around a USB cable, or you buy a card reader and haul that around.
Either one, you're going to lose.
What I do is, I take out the memory card, and I fold it in half, revealing USB contacts.
I just stick it in the computer, offload the pictures, put it right back in the camera. I never have to lose anything.
Here's another example.
Chris, you're the source of all power. Will you be my power plug?
Chris Anderson: Oh yeah. DP: Hold that and don't let go.
You might've seen this, this is Apple's new laptop. This the power cord. It hooks on like this.
And I'm sure every one of you has done this at some point in your lives, or one of your children.
You walk along -- and I'm about to pull this onto the floor. I don't care. It's a loaner.
Here we go. Whoa! It's magnetic -- it doesn't pull the laptop onto the floor.
In my very last example -- I do a lot of my work using speech recognition software.
And I'll just -- you have to be kind of quiet because the software is nervous.
Speech recognition software is really great for doing emails very quickly; period.
Like, I get hundreds of them a day; period.
And it's not just what I dictate that it writes down; period.
I also use this feature called voice macros; period.
Correct "dissuade."
Ok, this is not an ideal situation, because it's getting the echo from the hall and stuff.
The point is, I can respond to people very quickly by saying a short word, and having it write out a much longer thing.
So if somebody sends me a fan letter, I'll say, "Thanks for that."
And conversely, if somebody sends me hate mail -- which happens daily -- I say, "Piss off."
So that's my dirty little secret. Don't tell anyone.
So the point is -- this is a really interesting story.
This is version eight of this software, and do you know what they put in version eight?
No new features. It's never happened before in software!
The company put no new features.
They just said, "We'll make this software work right." Right?
Because for years, people had bought this software, tried it out -- 95 percent accuracy was all they got, which means one in 20 words is wrong -- and they'd put it in their drawer. And the company got sick of that, so they said, "This version, we're not going to do anything, but make sure it's darned accurate."
And so that's what they did. This cult of doing things right is starting to spread.
So, my final advice for those of you who are consumers of this technology: remember, if it doesn't work, it's not necessarily you, ok?
It could be the design of the thing you're using.
Be aware in life of good design and bad design.
And if you're among the people who create this stuff: Easy is hard.
Pre-sweat the details for your audience. Count the taps.
Remember, the hard part is not deciding what features to add, it's deciding what to leave out.
And best of all, your motivation is: simplicity sells.
CA: Bravo. DP: Thank you very much.
CA: Hear, hear!
Kurt Andersen: Like many architects, David is a hog for the limelight but is sufficiently reticent -- or at least pretends to be -- that he asked me to question him rather than speaking.
In fact what we're going to talk about, I think, is in fact a subject that is probably better served by a conversation than an address.
And I guess we have a bit of news clip to precede.
Dan Rather: Since the September 11th attack on the World Trade Center, many people have flocked to downtown New York to see and pay respects at what amounts to the 16-acre burial ground.
Now, as CBS's Jim Axelrod reports, they're putting the finishing touches on a new way for people to visit and view the scene.
Jim Axelrod: Forget the Empire State Building or the Statue of Liberty.
There's a new place in New York where the crowds are thickest -- Ground Zero.
Tourist: I've taken my step-daughter here from Indianapolis.
This was -- out of all the tourist sites in New York City -- this was her number-one pick.
JA: Thousands now line up on lower Broadway.
Tourist: I've been wanting to come down here since this happened.
JA: Even on the coldest winter days.
To honor and remember.
Tourist: It's reality, it's us. It happened here.
This is ours.
JA: So many, in fact, that seeing has become a bit of a problem.
Tourist: I think that people are very frustrated that they're not able to get closer to see what's going on.
JA: But that is about to change.
In record time, a team of architects and construction workers designed and built a viewing platform to ease the frustration and bring people closer.
Man: They'll get an incredible panorama and understand, I think more completely, the sheer totality of the destruction of the place.
JA: If you think about it, Ground Zero is unlike most any other tourist site in America.
Unlike the Grand Canyon or the Washington Monument, people come here to see what's no longer there.
David Rockwell: The first experience people will have here when they see this is not as a construction site but as this incredibly moving burial ground.
JA: The walls are bare by design, so people can fill them with their own memorials the way they already have along the current perimeter.
Tourist: From our hearts, it affected us just as much.
JA: The ramps are made of simple material -- the kind of plywood you see at construction sites -- which is really the whole point.
In the face of America's worst destruction people are building again.
Jim Axelrod, CBS News, New York.
KA: This is not an obvious subject to be in the sensuality segment, but certainly David you are known as -- I know, a phrase you hate -- an entertainment architect.
Your work is highly sensual, even hedonistic.
DR: I like that word.
KA: It's about pleasure -- casinos and hotels and restaurants.
How did the shock that all of us -- and especially all of us in New York -- felt on the 11th of September transmute into your desire to do this thing?
DR: Well the truth of the matter is, post-September 11th, I felt myself in the role originally -- first of all as someone who lives in Tribeca and whose neighborhood was devastated, and as someone who works less than a mile from there -- that I was in the role of forcing 100 people who work with me in my firm, to continue to have the same level of enthusiasm about creating the places we had been creating.
In fact we're finishing a book which is called "Pleasure," which is about sensual pleasure in spaces.
But I've got to tell you -- it became impossible to do that.
We were really paralyzed.
And I found myself the Friday after September 11th -- two days afterwards -- literally unable to motivate anyone to do anything.
We gave the office a few days off.
And in discussing this with other architects, we had seen people saying in the press that they should rebuild the towers as they were -- they should rebuild them 50 stories taller.
And I thought it was astonishing to speculate, as if this were a competition, on something that was such a fresh wound.
And I had a series of discussions -- first with Rick Scofidio and Liz Diller, who collaborated with us on this, and several other people -- and really felt like we had to find relevance in doing something.
And that as people who create places, the ultimate way to help wasn't to pontificate or to make up scenarios, but to help right now.
So we tried to come up with a way, as a group, to have a kind of design SWAT team.
And that was the mission that we came up with.
KA: Were you conscious of suddenly -- as a designer whose work is all about fulfilling wants -- suddenly fulfilling needs?
DR: Well what I was aware of was, there was this overwhelming need to act now.
And we were asked to participate in a few projects before this.
There was a school, PS 234, that had been evacuated down at Ground Zero.
They moved to an abandoned school.
We took about 20 or 30 architects and designers and artists, and over four days -- it was like this urban barn-raising -- to renovate it, and everyone wanted to help.
It was just extraordinary.
Tom Otterness contributed, Maira Kalman contributed and it became this cathartic experience for us.
KA: And that was done, effectively, by October 8 or something?
DR: Yeah.
KA: Obviously, what you faced in trying to do something as substantial as this project -- and this is only one of four that you've designed to surround the site -- you must have run up against the incredibly byzantine, entrenched bureaucracy and powers that be in New York real estate and New York politics.
DR: Well, it's a funny thing.
We finished PS 234, and had dinner with a small group.
I was actually asked to be a committee chair on an AIA committee to rebuild.
And I sat in on several meetings.
And there were the most circuitous grand plans that had to do with long-term infrastructure and rebuilding the entire city.
And the fact is that there were immediate wounds and needs that needed to be filled, and there was talk about inclusion and wanting it to be an inclusive process.
And it wasn't an inclusive group.
So we said, what is -- KA: It was not an inclusive group?
DR: It was not an inclusive group.
It was predominantly a white, rich, corporate group that was not representative of the city.
KA: Shocking.
DR: Yeah, surprising.
So Rick and Liz and Kevin and I came up with the idea.
The city actually approached us.
We first approached the city about Pier 94.
We saw how PS 234 worked.
The families -- the victims of the families -- were going to this pier that was incredibly dehumanizing.
KA: On the Hudson River?
DR: Yeah. And the city actually -- through Tim Zagat initially, and then through Christyne Nicholas, then we got to Giuliani -- said, "You know we don't want to do anything with Pier 94 right now, but we have an observation platform for the families down at Ground Zero that we'd like to be a more dignified experience for the families, and a way to protect it from the weather."
So I went down there with Rick and Liz and Kevin, and I've got to say, it was the most moving experience of my life.
It was devastating to see the simple plywood platform with a rail around it, where the families of the victims had left notes to them.
And there was no mediation between us and the experience.
There was no filter.
And I remembered on September 11th, on 14th Street, the roof of our building -- we can see the World Trade Towers prominently -- and I saw the first building collapse from a conference room on the eighth floor on a TV that we had set up.
And then everyone was up on the roof, so I ran up there.
And it was amazing how much harder it was to believe in real life than it was on TV.
There was something about the comfort of the filter and how much information was between us and the experience.
So seeing this in a very simple, dignified way was a very powerful experience.
So we went back to the city and said we're not particularly interested in the upgrade of this as a VIP platform, but we've spent some time down there.
At the same time the city had this need.
They were looking for a solution to deal with 30 or 40 thousand people a day who were going down there, that had nowhere to go.
And there was no way to deal with the traffic around the site.
So dealing with it is just an immediate master plan.
There was a way -- there had to be a way -- to get people to move around the site.
KA: But then you've got to figure out a way -- we will skip over the insanely tedious process of getting permits and getting everybody on board -- but simply funding this thing.
It looks like a fairly simple thing, but this was a half a million dollar project?
DR: Well, we knew that if it wasn't privately funded, it wasn't going to happen.
And we also, frankly, knew that if it didn't happen by the end of the Giuliani administration, then everyone who we were dealing with at the DOT and the Police Department and all of the -- we were meeting with 20 or 30 people with the city at a time, and it was set up by the Office of Emergency Management.
This incredible act on their part, because they really wanted this, and they sensed that this needed to happen.
KA: And there was therefore this ticking clock, because Giuliani was obviously out three months after that.
DR: Yeah. So the first thing we had to do was find a way to get this -- we had to work with the families of the victims, through the city, to make sure that they knew this was happening.
Because this didn't want to be a surprise.
And we also had to be as under the radar screen as we could be in New York, because the key was not raising a lot of objection and sort of working as quietly as possible.
We came up with the idea of setting up a foundation, mainly because when we found a contractor who would build this, he would not agree to do this, even if we would pay him the money.
There needed to be a foundation in place.
So we came up with a foundation, and actually what happened was one major developer in New York -- KA: Who shall remain nameless, I guess?
DR: Yeah. His initials are JS, and he owns Rockefeller Center, if that helps anyone -- volunteered to help.
And we met with him.
The prices from the contractors were between five to 700,000 dollars.
And Atlantic-Heydt, who's the largest scaffolding contractor in the country, volunteered to do it at cost.
So this developer said, "You know what, we'll underwrite the entire expense."
And we said, "That's incredible!"
And I think this was the 21st, and we knew this had to be built and up by the 28th.
And we had to start construction the next day.
We had a meeting that evening with his contractor of choice, and the contractor showed up with the drawings of the platform about half the size that we had drawn it.
KA: Sort of like the Spinal Tap scene where you get the tiny little Stonehenge, I guess?
DR: In fact, it was as if this was going to be window-washing scaffolding.
There was no sense of the fact that this is next to Saint Paul -- that this is really a place that needs to be kind of dignified, and a place to reflect and remember.
And I've got to say that we spent a lot of time in putting this together, watching the crowds that gathered at Saint Paul -- which is just to the right -- and moving around the site.
And I live down there, so we spent a lot of time looking at the need.
And I think people were amazed at two things -- I think they were amazed at the destruction, but I think there was a sense of disbelief about the heroics of New Yorkers that I found very moving.
Just the sort of everyday heroics of New Yorkers.
So we were in this meeting and the contractor literally said, "I'm going to lock the door, because this developer will not agree to have you leave till you've signed off on this."
And we said, "Well, this is half the size, it doesn't have any of the design features that have been agreed upon by everyone -- everyone in the city.
We'd have to go back to the beginning to do this."
And I convinced him that we should leave the room with the agreement to build it as designed.
The next day I got an email from the developer saying that he was withdrawing all funding.
So we didn't know what to do, but we decided to cast a very wide net.
We emailed out letters to as many people as we could -- several people in the audience here -- who were very helpful.
KA: There was no thought of abandoning ship at that point?
DR: No. In fact I told the contractor to go ahead.
He had already ordered materials based on my go-ahead.
We knew that one way or another this was going to happen.
And we just felt it had to happen.
KA: You were funding it yourself and with contributions and this foundation.
Richard, I think very correctly, made the point at the beginning -- before all the chair designers came out -- about the history of chair designers imposing aesthetic solutions on this kind of universal, banal, common problem of sitting.
It seems to me with this, that it was the opposite of that.
This was an unprecedented, singular design problem.
DR: Well here's the issue: we knew that this was not in the sense of -- we think about the site, and think about the need for a memorial.
It was important that this not be categorized as a memorial.
That this was a place for people to reflect, to remember -- a kind of quiet place.
So it led us to using design solutions that created as few filters between the viewer -- as we said about the families' platform -- and the experience as possible.
It's all incredibly humble material.
It's scaffolding and plywood.
And it allows -- by sort of the procession of the movement, up by Saint Paul's and down the other side -- it gives you about 300 feet to go up 13 feet from the ground to where you get the 360 degree view.
But the design was driven by a need to be quick, cheap, safe, respectful, flexible.
One of the other things is this is designed to be moveable.
Because when we looked at the four platforms around the site, one of which is an upgrade of the families' platform, we knew that these had to be moveable to respond to changing conditions, and the changing definition of what Ground Zero is.
KA: Your work -- I mean, we've talked about this before -- a lot of your work, I think, is informed by your belief in, or your focus on the temporariness of all things and the evanescence of things, and a kind of "Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die," sort of sense of existence.
This is clearly not a work for the ages.
You know, a couple of years this thing isn't going to be here.
Did that require, as an architect, a new way of thinking about what you were doing?
To think of it as this purely temporary installation?
DR: No, I don't think so.
I think this is, obviously, substantially different from anything we'd ever thought about doing before, just by the nature of it.
Where it overlaps with thoughts about our work in general is, number one -- the notion of collaboration as a sort of way to get things done.
And Kevin Kennon, Rick Scofidio, Liz Diller and all the people within the city -- Norman Lear, who I spoke to four hours before our deadline for funding, offered to give us a bridge loan to help us get through it.
So the notion of collaboration -- I think this reinforces how important that is.
And in terms of the temporary nature of it, our goal was not to create something that would be there longer than it needed to be.
I think what we were most interested in was promoting a kind of dialogue that we felt may not have been happening enough in this city, about what's really happening there.
And a day or two before it opened was Giuliani's farewell address, where he proposed the idea of all of Ground Zero being a memorial.
Which was very controversial, but it resonated with a lot of people.
And I think regardless of what the position is about how this sacred piece of land is to be used, having it come out of actually seeing it in a real encounter, I think makes it a more powerful dialogue.
And that's what we were interested in.
So that, very much, is in the realm of things I've been interested in before.
KA: It seems to me, among other things, a lovely piece of civic infrastructure.
It enables that conversation to get serious.
And six months after the fact -- and only a few months away from the site being cleaned -- we are very quickly, now, getting to the point where those conversations about what should go there are getting serious.
Do you have -- having been as physically involved in the site as you have been doing this project -- have any ideas about what should or shouldn't be done?
DR: Well, I think one thing that shouldn't be done is evaluate -- I think right now the discussion is a very closed discussion on the master plan.
The Protetch Gallery recently had a show on ideas for buildings, which had some sort of inventive ideas of buildings.
KA: But it had some really terrible ideas.
DR: And it also felt a little bit like a kind of competition of ideas, where I think the focus of ideas should be on master planning and uses.
And I think there should be a broader -- which there's starting to be -- the dialogue is really opening up to, what does this site really want to be?
And I truly believe until the issue of memorial is sorted out, that it's going to be very hard to have an intelligent discussion.
There's a few discussions right now that I think are very positive, about depressing the West Side Highway and connecting this over, so that there's one uninterrupted piece of land.
KA: Well, I think that's interesting.
And it gets to another issue that was probably inappropriate to discuss six months ago, but perhaps isn't now, which is, not many of us love the World Trade Center as a piece of architecture, as what it had done to this city and that huge plaza.
Is this an opportunity, is the silver lining -- a silver lining, here -- to rebuild some more traditional city grid, or not?
DR: I think there's a real opportunity to engage in a discussion of why we live in cities.
And why do we live in places where such dissimilar people collide up against us each day?
I don't think it has much to do with 50 or 60 or 70 or 80 thousand new office spaces, regardless of what the number is.
So yeah, I think there is a chance to re-look at how we think about cities.
And in fact, there's a proposal on the table now for building number seven.
KA: Which was the building just north of the Towers?
DR: Right, which the towers fell into.
And the reason that's been held up is essentially by community outrage that they're not re-opening the street to connect that back to the rest of the city.
I think a public dialogue -- I think, you know, I'd like to see an international competition, and a call for ideas for uses.
KA: Whether it's arts, whether it's housing, whether it's what amount of shopping?
DR: Right. And we're looking for other things.
This small foundation we put together is looking for other ways to help.
Including taking a small piece adjacent to the site and inviting 10 architects who currently don't have a voice in New York to do artist housing.
And find other ways to encourage the discussion to be against sort of monolithic, single solutions, and more about a multiplicity of things.
KA: Before we end, I know you have a piece of digital video of the experience of being on this platform?
DR: John Kamen -- who's here, actually -- put together a two and a half minute piece that shows the platform in use.
So I thought that would be good to end with.
DR: We're looking from Fulton Street, west.
One of the tricky issues we had with the Giuliani administration was I had forgotten how anti-graffiti he was.
And essentially our structure was designed to be written on.
KA: As you say, it's not a memorial.
But were you conscious of memorials? The Vietnam Memorial?
Those kinds of forms?
DR: We certainly did as much research as we could, and we were conscious of other memorials.
And also the complexity and length of time they really take to do.
It's 350 people on the committee for Oklahoma City, which is why we thought of this as a sort of ad-hoc, spontaneous solution that expanded on Union Square and the places that were ad-hoc memorials in the city already.
The scaffolding you can see built up over the street is de-mountable.
What's interesting now is the nature of the site has totally changed, so that what you're aware of is not just the destruction of the buildings in Ground Zero, but all of the buildings around it -- and the scars on the building around it, which are enormous.
This shows Saint Paul's on the left.
KA: I just want to thank you on behalf of New Yorkers for making this happen and getting this done.
But the kind of virtually instantaneous nature of its erection, and its being there, almost before you could believe that a response of this magnitude could be accomplished, is part of its extraordinary -- I don't know if beauty is the word -- but presence.
DR: It was an honor to do.
And we were thrilled to be able to show it here.
As you pointed out, every time you come here, you learn something.
This morning, the world's experts from I guess three or four different companies on building seats, I think concluded that ultimately, the solution is, people shouldn't sit down.
I could have told them that.
Yesterday, the automotive guys gave us some new insights.
They pointed out that, I believe it was between 30 and 50 years from today, they will be steering cars by wire, without all that mechanical stuff.
That's reassuring.
They then pointed out that there'd be, sort of, the other controls by wire, to get rid of all that mechanical stuff.
That's pretty good, but why not get rid of the wires?
Then you don't need anything to control the car, except thinking about it.
I would love to talk about the technology, and sometime, in what's past the 15 minutes, I'll be happy to talk to all the techno-geeks around here about what's in here.
But if I had one thing to say about this, before we get to first, it would be that from the time we started building this, the big idea wasn't the technology.
It really was a big idea in technology when we started applying it in the iBOT for the disabled community.
The big idea here is, I think, a new piece of a solution to a fairly big problem in transportation.
And maybe to put that in perspective: there's so much data on this, I'll be happy to give it to you in different forms.
You never know what strikes the fancy of whom, but everybody is perfectly willing to believe the car changed the world.
And Henry Ford, just about 100 years ago, started cranking out Model Ts.
What I don't think most people think about is the context of how technology is applied.
For instance, in that time, 91 percent of America lived either on farms or in small towns.
So, the car -- the horseless carriage that replaced the horse and carriage -- was a big deal; it went twice as fast as a horse and carriage.
It was half as long.
And it was an environmental improvement, because, for instance, in 1903 they outlawed horses and buggies in downtown Manhattan, because you can imagine what the roads look like when you have a million horses, and a million of them urinating and doing other things, and the typhoid and other problems created were almost unimaginable.
So the car was the clean environmental alternative to a horse and buggy.
It also was a way for people to get from their farm to a farm, or their farm to a town, or from a town to a city.
It all made sense, with 91 percent of the people living there.
By the 1950s, we started connecting all the towns together with what a lot of people claim is the eighth wonder of the world, the highway system.
And it is certainly a wonder.
And by the way, as I take shots at old technologies, I want to assure everybody, and particularly the automotive industry -- who's been very supportive of us -- that I don't think this in any way competes with airplanes, or cars.
But think about where the world is today.
50 percent of the global population now lives in cities.
That's 3.2 billion people.
We've solved all the transportation problems that have changed the world to get it to where we are today.
500 years ago, sailing ships started getting reliable enough; we found a new continent.
150 years ago, locomotives got efficient enough, steam power, that we turned the continent into a country.
Over the last hundred years, we started building cars, and then over the 50 years we've connected every city to every other city in an extraordinarily efficient way, and we have a very high standard of living as a consequence of that.
But during that entire process, more and more people have been born, and more and more people are moving to cities.
China alone is going to move four to six hundred million people into cities in the next decade and a half.
And so, nobody, I think, would argue that airplanes, in the last 50 years, have turned the continent and the country now into a neighborhood.
And if you just look at how technology has been applied, we've solved all the long-range, high-speed, high-volume, large-weight problems of moving things around.
Nobody would want to give them up.
And I certainly wouldn't want to give up my airplane, or my helicopter, or my Humvee, or my Porsche.
I love them all. I don't keep any of them in my living room.
The fact is, the last mile is the problem, and half the world now lives in dense cities.
And people spend, depending on who they are, between 90 and 95 percent of their energy getting around on foot.
I think there's -- I don't know what data would impress you, but how about, 43 percent of the refined fuel produced in the world is consumed by cars in metropolitan areas in the United States.
Three million people die every year in cities due to bad air, and almost all particulate pollution on this planet is produced by transportation devices, particularly sitting in cities.
And again, I say that not to attack any industry, I think -- I really do -- I love my airplane, and cars on highways moving 60 miles an hour are extraordinarily efficient, both from an engineering point of view, an energy consumption point of view, and a utility point of view.
And we all love our cars, and I do.
The problem is, you get into the city and you want to go four blocks, it's neither fun nor efficient nor productive.
It's not sustainable.
If -- in China, in the year 1998, 417 million people used bicycles; 1.7 million people used cars.
If five percent of that population became, quote, middle class, and wanted to go the way we've gone in the last hundred years at the same time that 50 percent of their population are moving into cities of the size and density of Manhattan, every six weeks -- it isn't sustainable environmentally; it isn't sustainable economically -- there just ain't enough oil --
and it's not sustainable politically.
I mean, what are we fighting over right now?
We can make it complicated, but what's the world fighting over right now?
So it seemed to me that somebody had to work on that last mile, and it was dumb luck. We were working on iBOTs, but once we made this, we instantly decided it could be a great alternative to jet skis. You don't need the water.
Or snowmobiles. You don't need the snow.
Or skiing. It's just fun, and people love to move around doing fun things.
And every one of those industries, by the way -- just golf carts alone is a multi-billion-dollar industry.
But rather than go license this off, which is what we normally do, it seemed to me that if we put all our effort not into the technology, but into an understanding of a world that's solved all its other problems, but has somehow come to accept that cities -- which, right back from ancient Greece on, were meant to walk around, cities that were architected and built for people --
now have a footprint that, while we've solved every other transportation problem -- and it's like Moore's law.
I mean, look at the time it took to cross a continent in a Conestoga wagon, then on a railroad, then an airplane.
Every other form of transportation's been improved.
In 5,000 years, we've gone backwards in getting around cities.
They've gotten bigger; they're spread out.
The most expensive real estate on this planet in every city -- Wilshire Boulevard, or Fifth Avenue, or Tokyo, or Paris -- the most expensive real estate is their downtowns.
65 percent of the landmass of our cities are parked cars.
The 20 largest cities in the world.
So you wonder, what if cities could give to their pedestrians what we take for granted as we now go between cities?
What if you could make them fun, attractive, clean, environmentally friendly?
What if it would make it a little bit more palatable to have access via this, as that last link to mass transit, to get out to your cars so we can all live in the suburbs and use our cars the way we want, and then have our cities energized again?
We thought it would be really neat to do that, and one of the problems we really were worried about is: how do we get legal on the sidewalk?
Because technically I've got motors; I've got wheels -- I'm a motor vehicle.
I don't look like a motor vehicle.
I have the same footprint as a pedestrian; I have the same unique capability to deal with other pedestrians in a crowded space.
I took this down to Ground Zero, and knocked my way through crowds for an hour.
I'm a pedestrian. But the law typically lags technology by a generation or two, and if we get told we don't belong on the sidewalk, we have two choices.
We're a recreational vehicle that doesn't really matter, and I don't spend my time doing that kind of stuff.
Or maybe we should be out in the street in front of a Greyhound bus or a vehicle.
We've been so concerned about that, we went to the Postmaster General of the United States, as the first person we ever showed on the outside, and said, "Put your people on it. Everybody trusts their postman.
And they belong on the sidewalks, and they'll use it seriously."
He agreed. We went to a number of police departments that want their police officers back in the neighborhood on the beat, carrying 70 pounds of stuff. They love it.
And I can't believe a policeman is going to give themselves a ticket.
So we've been working really, really hard, but we knew that the technology would not be as hard to develop as an attitude about what's important, and how to apply the technology.
We went out and we found some visionary people with enough money to let us design and build these things, and in hopefully enough time to get them accepted.
So, I'm happy, really, I am happy to talk about this technology as much as you want.
And yes, it's really fun, and yes, you should all go out and try it.
But if I could ask you to do one thing, it's not to think about it as a piece of technology, but just imagine that, although we all understand somehow that it's reasonable that we use our 4,000-pound machine, which can go 60 miles an hour, that can bring you everywhere you want to go, and somehow it's also what we used for the last mile, and it's broken, and it doesn't work.
One of the more exciting things that occurred to us about why it might get accepted, happened out here in California.
A few weeks ago, after we launched it, we were here with a news crew on Venice Beach, zipping up and back, and he's marveling at the technology, and meanwhile bicycles are zipping by, and skateboarders are zipping by, and a little old lady -- I mean, if you looked in the dictionary, a little old lady -- came by me -- and now that I'm on this, I'm the height of a normal adult now --
and she just stops, and the camera is there, and she looks up at me and says, "Can I try that?"
And what was I -- you know, how are you going to say anything?
And so I said, "Sure."
So I get off, and she gets on, and with a little bit of the usual, ah, then she turns around, and she goes about 20 feet, and she turns back around, and she's all smiles.
And she comes back to me and she stops, and she says, "Finally, they made something for us."
And the camera is looking down at her.
I'm thinking, "Wow, that was great --  -- please lady, don't say another word."
And the camera is down at her, and this guy has to put the microphone in her face, said, "What do you mean by that?"
And I figured, "It's all over now," and she looks up and she says, "Well," she's still watching these guys go; she says, "I can't ride a bike," no, she says, "I can't use a skateboard, and I've never used roller blades," she knew them by name; she says, "And it's been 50 years since I rode a bicycle."
Then she looks up, she's looking up, and she says, "And I'm 81 years old, and I don't drive a car anymore.
I still have to get to the store, and I can't carry a lot of things."
And it suddenly occurred to me, that among my many fears, were not just that the bureaucracy and the regulators and the legislators might not get it -- it was that, fundamentally, you believe there's pressure among the people not to invade the most precious little bit of space left, the sidewalks in these cities.
When you look at the 36 inches of legal requirement for sidewalk, then the eight foot for the parked car, then the three lanes, and then the other eight feet -- it's -- that little piece is all that's there.
But she looks up and says this, and it occurs to me, well, kids aren't going to mind these things, and they don't vote, and business people and then young adults aren't going to mind these things -- they're pretty cool -- so I guess subliminally I was worried that it's the older population that's going to worry.
So, having seen this, and having worried about it for eight years, the first thing I do is pick up my phone and ask our marketing and regulatory guys, call AARP, get an appointment right away.
We've got to show them this thing.
And they took it to Washington; they showed them; and they're going to be involved now, watching how these things get absorbed in a number of cities, like Atlanta, where we're doing trials to see if it really can, in fact, help re-energize their downtown.
The bottom line is, whether you believe the United Nations, or any of the other think tanks -- in the next 20 years, all human population growth on this planet will be in cities.
In Asia alone, it will be over a billion people.
They learned to start with cell phones.
They didn't have to take the 100-year trip we took.
They start at the top of the technology food chain.
We've got to start building cities and human environments where a 150-pound person can go a couple of miles in a dense, rich, green-space environment, without being in a 4,000-pound machine to do it.
Cars were not meant for parallel parking; they're wonderful machines to go between cities, but just think about it: we've solved all the long-range, high-speed problems.
The Greeks went from the theater of Dionysus to the Parthenon in their sandals.
You do it in your sneakers.
Not much has changed.
If this thing goes only three times as fast as walking -- three times -- a 30-minute walk becomes 10 minutes.
Your choice, when living in a city, if it's now 10 minutes -- because at 30 minutes you want an alternative, whether it's a bus, a train -- we've got to build an infrastructure -- a light rail -- or you're going to keep parking those cars.
But if you could put a pin in most cities, and imagine how far you could, if you had the time, walk in one half-hour, it's the city.
If you could make it fun, and make it eight or 10 minutes, you can't find your car, un-park your car, move your car, re-park your car and go somewhere; you can't get to a cab or a subway.
We could change the way people allocate their resources, the way this planet uses its energy, make it more fun.
And we're hoping to some extent history will say we were right.
That's Segway. This is a Stirling cycle engine; this had been confused by a lot of things we're doing.
This little beast, right now, is producing a few hundred watts of electricity.
Yes, it could be attached to this, and yes, on a kilogram of propane, you could drive from New York to Boston if you so choose.
Perhaps more interesting about this little engine is it'll burn any fuel, because some of you might be skeptical about the capability of this to have an impact, where most of the world you can't simply plug into your 120-volt outlet.
We've been working on this, actually, as an alternative energy source, starting way back with Johnson &amp; Johnson, to run an iBOT, because the best batteries you could get -- 10 watt-hours per kilogram in lead, 20 watt-hours per kilogram nickel-cadmium, 40 watt-hours per kilogram in nickel-metal hydride, 60 watt-hours per kilogram in lithium, 8,750 watt-hours of energy in every kilogram of propane or gasoline -- which is why nobody drives electric cars.
But, in any event, if you can burn it with the same efficiency -- because it's external combustion -- as your kitchen stove, if you can burn any fuel, it turns out to be pretty neat.
It makes just enough electricity to, for instance, do this, which at night is enough electricity, in the rest of the world, as Mr. Holly -- Dr. Holly -- pointed out, can run computers and a light bulb.
But more interestingly, the thermodynamics of this say, you're never going to get more than 20 percent efficiency.
It doesn't matter much -- it says if you get 200 watts of electricity, you'll get 700 or 800 watts of heat.
If you wanted to boil water and re-condense it at a rate of 10 gallons an hour, it takes about 25, a little over 25.3 kilowatt -- 25,000 watts of continuous power -- to do it.
That's so much energy, you couldn't afford to desalinate or clean water in this country that way.
Certainly, in the rest of the world, your choice is to devastate the place, turning everything that will burn into heat, or drink the water that's available.
The number one cause of death on this planet among humans is bad water.
Depending on whose numbers you believe, it's between 60 and 85,000 people per day.
We don't need sophisticated heart transplants around the world.
We need water.
And women shouldn't have to spend four hours a day looking for it, or watching their kids die.
We figured out how to put a vapor-compression distiller on this thing, with a counter-flow heat exchanger to take the waste heat, then using a little bit of the electricity control that process, and for 450 watts, which is a little more than half of its waste heat, it will make 10 gallons an hour of distilled water from anything that comes into it to cool it.
So if we put this box on here in a few years, could we have a solution to transportation, electricity, and communication, and maybe drinkable water in a sustainable package that weighs 60 pounds?
I don't know, but we'll try it.
I better shut up.
With all the legitimate concerns about AIDS and avian flu -- and we'll hear about that from the brilliant Dr. Brilliant later today -- I want to talk about the other pandemic, which is cardiovascular disease, diabetes, hypertension -- all of which are completely preventable for at least 95 percent of people just by changing diet and lifestyle.
And what's happening is that there's a globalization of illness occurring, that people are starting to eat like us, and live like us, and die like us. And in one generation, for example, Asia's gone from having one of the lowest rates of heart disease and obesity and diabetes to one of the highest. And in Africa, cardiovascular disease equals the HIV and AIDS deaths in most countries.
So there's a critical window of opportunity we have to make an important difference that can affect the lives of literally millions of people, and practice preventive medicine on a global scale.
Heart and blood vessel diseases still kill more people -- not only in this country, but also worldwide -- than everything else combined, and yet it's completely preventable for almost everybody.
It's not only preventable; it's actually reversible. And for the last almost 29 years, we've been able to show that by simply changing diet and lifestyle, using these very high-tech, expensive, state-of-the-art measures to prove how powerful these very simple and low-tech and low-cost interventions can be like -- quantitative arteriography, before and after a year, and cardiac PET scans.
We showed a few months ago -- we published the first study showing you can actually stop or reverse the progression of prostate cancer by making changes in diet and lifestyle, and 70 percent regression in the tumor growth, or inhibition of the tumor growth, compared to only nine percent in the control group.
And in the MRI and MR spectroscopy here, the prostate tumor activity is shown in red -- you can see it diminishing after a year.
Now there is an epidemic of obesity: two-thirds of adults and 15 percent of kids. What's really concerning to me is that diabetes has increased 70 percent in the past 10 years, and this may be the first generation in which our kids live a shorter life span than we do. That's pitiful, and it's preventable.
Now these are not election returns, these are the people -- the number of the people who are obese by state, beginning in '85, '86, '87 -- these are from the CDC website -- '88, '89, '90, '91 -- you get a new category -- '92, '93, '94, '95, '96, '97, '98, '99, 2000, 2001 -- it gets worse. We're kind of devolving.  Now what can we do about this? Well, you know, the
diet that we've found that can reverse heart disease and cancer is an Asian diet.
But the people in Asia are starting to eat like we are, which is why they're starting to get sick like we are.
So I've been working with a lot of the big food companies. They can make it fun and sexy and hip and crunchy and convenient to eat healthier foods, like -- I chair the advisory boards to McDonald's, and PepsiCo, and ConAgra, and Safeway, and soon Del Monte, and they're finding that it's good business.
The salads that you see at McDonald's came from the work -- they're going to have an Asian salad. At Pepsi, two-thirds of their revenue growth came from their better foods.
And so if we can do that, then we can free up resources for buying drugs that you really do need for treating AIDS and HIV and malaria and for preventing avian flu. Thank you.
Good morning everyone. First of all, it's been fantastic being here over these past few days.
And secondly, I feel it's a great honor to kind of wind up this extraordinary gathering of people, these amazing talks that we've had. I feel that I've fitted in, in many ways, to some of the things that I've heard.
I came directly here from the deep, deep tropical rainforest in Ecuador, where I was out -- you could only get there by a plane -- with indigenous people with paint on their faces and parrot feathers on their headdresses, where these people are fighting to try and keep the oil companies, and keep the roads, out of their forests.
They're fighting to develop their own way of living within the forest in a world that's clean, a world that isn't contaminated, a world that isn't polluted.
And what was so amazing to me, and what fits right in with what we're all talking about here at TED, is that there, right in the middle of this rainforest, was some solar panels -- the first in that part of Ecuador -- and that was mainly to bring water up by pump so that the women wouldn't have to go down.
The water was cleaned, but because they got a lot of batteries, they were able to store a lot of electricity.
So every house -- and there were, I think, eight houses in this little community -- could have light for, I think it was about half an hour each evening.
And there is the Chief, in all his regal finery, with a laptop computer.
And this man, he has been outside, but he's gone back, and he was saying, "You know, we have suddenly jumped into a whole new era, and we didn't even know about the white man 50 years ago, and now here we are with laptop computers, and there are some things we want to learn from the modern world.
We want to know about health care.
We want to know about what other people do -- we're interested in it.
And we want to learn other languages.
We want to know English and French and perhaps Chinese, and we're good at languages."
So there he is with his little laptop computer, but fighting against the might of the pressures -- because of the debt, the foreign debt of Ecuador -- fighting the pressure of World Bank, IMF, and of course the people who want to exploit the forests and take out the oil.
And so, coming directly from there to here.
But, of course, my real field of expertise lies in an even different kind of civilization -- I can't really call it a civilization.
A different way of life, a different being.
We've talked earlier -- this wonderful talk by Wade Davis about the different cultures of the humans around the world -- but the world is not composed only of human beings; there are also other animal beings.
And I propose to bring into this TED conference, as I always do around the world, the voice of the animal kingdom.
Too often we just see a few slides, or a bit of film, but these beings have voices that mean something.
And so, I want to give you a greeting, as from a chimpanzee in the forests of Tanzania -- Ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh!
I've been studying chimpanzees in Tanzania since 1960.
During that time, there have been modern technologies that have really transformed the way that field biologists do their work.
For example, for the first time, a few years ago, by simply collecting little fecal samples we were able to have them analyzed -- to have DNA profiling done -- so for the first time, we actually know which male chimps are the fathers of each individual infant.
Because the chimps have a very promiscuous mating society.
So this opens up a whole new avenue of research.
And we use GSI -- geographic whatever it is, GSI -- to determine the range of the chimps.
And we're using -- you can see that I'm not really into this kind of stuff -- but we're using satellite imagery to look at the deforestation in the area.
And of course, there's developments in infrared, so you can watch animals at night, and equipment for recording by video, and tape recording is getting lighter and better.
So in many, many ways, we can do things today that we couldn't do when I began in 1960.
Especially when chimpanzees, and other animals with large brains, are studied in captivity, modern technology is helping us to search for the upper levels of cognition in some of these non-human animals.
So that we know today, they're capable of performances that would have been thought absolutely impossible by science when I began.
I think the chimpanzee in captivity who is the most skilled in intellectual performance is one called Ai in Japan -- her name means love -- and she has a wonderfully sensitive partner working with her.
She loves her computer -- she'll leave her big group, and her running water, and her trees and everything.
And she'll come in to sit at this computer -- it's like a video game for a kid; she's hooked.
She's 28, by the way, and she does things with her computer screen and a touch pad that she can do faster than most humans.
She does very complex tasks, and I haven't got time to go into them, but the amazing thing about this female is she doesn't like making mistakes.
If she has a bad run, and her score isn't good, she'll come and reach up and tap on the glass -- because she can't see the experimenter -- which is asking to have another go.
And her concentration -- she's already concentrated hard for 20 minutes or so, and now she wants to do it all over again, just for the satisfaction of having done it better.
And the food is not important -- she does get a tiny reward, like one raisin for a correct response -- but she will do it for nothing, if you tell her beforehand.
So here we are, a chimpanzee using a computer.
Chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans also learn human sign language.
But the point is that when I was first in Gombe in 1960 -- I remember so well, so vividly, as though it was yesterday -- the first time, when I was going through the vegetation, the chimpanzees were still running away from me, for the most part, although some were a little bit acclimatized -- and I saw this dark shape, hunched over a termite mound, and I peered with my binoculars.
It was, fortunately, one adult male whom I'd named David Greybeard -- and by the way, science at that time was telling me that I shouldn't name the chimps; they should all have numbers; that was more scientific.
Anyway, David Greybeard -- and I saw that he was picking little pieces of grass and using them to fish termites from their underground nest.
And not only that -- he would sometimes pick a leafy twig and strip the leaves -- modifying an object to make it suitable for a specific purpose -- the beginning of tool-making.
The reason this was so exciting and such a breakthrough is at that time, it was thought that humans, and only humans, used and made tools.
When I was at school, we were defined as man, the toolmaker.
So that when Louis Leakey, my mentor, heard this news, he said, "Ah, we must now redefine 'man,' redefine 'tool,' or accept chimpanzees as humans."
We now know that at Gombe alone, there are nine different ways in which chimpanzees use different objects for different purposes.
Moreover, we know that in different parts of Africa, wherever chimps have been studied, there are completely different tool-using behaviors.
And because it seems that these patterns are passed from one generation to the next, through observation, imitation and practice -- that is a definition of human culture.
What we find is that over these 40-odd years that I and others have been studying chimpanzees and the other great apes, and, as I say, other mammals with complex brains and social systems, we have found that after all, there isn't a sharp line dividing humans from the rest of the animal kingdom.
It's a very wuzzy line.
It's getting wuzzier all the time as we find animals doing things that we, in our arrogance, used to think was just human.
The chimps -- there's no time to discuss their fascinating lives -- but they have this long childhood, five years of suckling and sleeping with the mother, and then another three, four or five years of emotional dependence on her, even when the next child is born.
The importance of learning in that time, when behavior is flexible -- and there's an awful lot to learn in chimpanzee society.
The long-term affectionate supportive bonds that develop throughout this long childhood with the mother, with the brothers and sisters, and which can last through a lifetime, which may be up to 60 years.
They can actually live longer than 60 in captivity, so we've only done 40 years in the wild so far.
And we find chimps are capable of true compassion and altruism.
We find in their non-verbal communication -- this is very rich -- they have a lot of sounds, which they use in different circumstances, but they also use touch, posture, gesture, and what do they do?
They kiss; they embrace; they hold hands.
They pat one another on the back; they swagger; they shake their fist -- the kind of things that we do, and they do them in the same kind of context.
They have very sophisticated cooperation.
Sometimes they hunt -- not that often, but when they hunt, they show sophisticated cooperation, and they share the prey.
We find that they show emotions, similar to -- maybe sometimes the same -- as those that we describe in ourselves as happiness, sadness, fear, despair.
They know mental as well as physical suffering.
And I don't have time to go into the information that will prove some of these things to you, save to say that there are very bright students, in the best universities, studying emotions in animals, studying personalities in animals.
We know that chimpanzees and some other creatures can recognize themselves in mirrors -- "self" as opposed to "other."
They have a sense of humor, and these are the kind of things which traditionally have been thought of as human prerogatives.
But this teaches us a new respect -- and it's a new respect not only for the chimpanzees, I suggest, but some of the other amazing animals with whom we share this planet.
Once we're prepared to admit that after all, we're not the only beings with personalities, minds and above all feelings, and then we start to think about ways we use and abuse so many other sentient, sapient creatures on this planet, it really gives cause for deep shame, at least for me.
So, the sad thing is that these chimpanzees -- who've perhaps taught us, more than any other creature, a little humility -- are in the wild, disappearing very fast.
They're disappearing for the reasons that all of you in this room know only too well.
The deforestation, the growth of human populations, needing more land.
They're disappearing because some timber companies go in with clear-cutting.
They're disappearing in the heart of their range in Africa because the big multinational logging companies have come in and made roads -- as they want to do in Ecuador and other parts where the forests remain untouched -- to take out oil or timber.
And this has led in Congo basin, and other parts of the world, to what is known as the bush-meat trade.
This means that although for hundreds, perhaps thousands of years, people have lived in those forests, or whatever habitat it is, in harmony with their world, just killing the animals they need for themselves and their families -- now, suddenly, because of the roads, the hunters can go in from the towns.
They shoot everything, every single thing that moves that's bigger than a small rat; they sun-dry it or smoke it.
And now they've got transport; they take it on the logging trucks or the mining trucks into the towns where they sell it.
And people will pay more for bush-meat, as it's called, than for domestic meat -- it's culturally preferred.
And it's not sustainable, and the huge logging camps in the forest are now demanding meat, so the Pygmy hunters in the Congo basin who've lived there with their wonderful way of living for so many hundreds of years are now corrupted.
They're given weapons; they shoot for the logging camps; they get money.
Their culture is being destroyed, along with the animals upon whom they depend.
So, when the logging camp moves, there's nothing left.
We talked already about the loss of human cultural diversity, and I've seen it happening with my own eyes.
And the grim picture in Africa -- I love Africa, and what do we see in Africa?
We see deforestation; we see disease and we see population growth in areas where there are more people living on a certain piece of land than the land can possibly support, and they're too poor to buy food from elsewhere.
Were the people that we heard about yesterday, on the Easter Island, who cut down their last tree -- were they stupid?
Didn't they know what was happening?
Of course, but if you've seen the crippling poverty in some of these parts of the world it isn't a question of "Let's leave the tree for tomorrow."
"How am I going to feed my family today?
Maybe I can get just a few dollars from this last tree which will keep us going a little bit longer, and then we'll pray that something will happen to save us from the inevitable end."
So, this is a pretty grim picture.
The one thing we have, which makes us so different from chimpanzees or other living creatures, is this sophisticated spoken language -- a language with which we can tell children about things that aren't here.
We can talk about the distant past, plan for the distant future, discuss ideas with each other, so that the ideas can grow from the accumulated wisdom of a group.
We can do it by talking to each other; we can do it through video; we can do it through the written word.
And we are abusing this great power we have to be wise stewards, and we're destroying the world.
In the developed world, in a way, it's worse, because we have so much access to knowledge of the stupidity of what we're doing.
Do you know, we're bringing little babies into a world where, in many places, the water is poisoning them?
And the air is harming them, and the food that's grown from the contaminated land is poisoning them.
And that's not just in the far-away developing world; that's everywhere.
Do you know we all have about 50 chemicals in our bodies we didn't have about 50 years ago?
And so many of these diseases, like asthma and certain kinds of cancers, are on the increase around places where our filthy toxic waste is dumped.
We're harming ourselves around the world, as well as harming the animals, as well as harming nature herself -- Mother Nature, that brought us into being; Mother Nature, where I believe we need to spend time, where there's trees and flowers and birds for our good psychological development.
And yet, there are hundreds and hundreds of children in the developed world who never see nature, because they're growing up in concrete and all they know is virtual reality, with no opportunity to go and lie in the sun, or in the forest, with the dappled sun-specks coming down from the canopy above.
As I was traveling around the world, you know, I had to leave the forest -- that's where I love to be.
I had to leave these fascinating chimpanzees for my students and field staff to continue studying because, finding they dwindled from about two million 100 years ago to about 150,000 now, I knew I had to leave the forest to do what I could to raise awareness around the world.
And the more I talked about the chimpanzees' plight, the more I realized the fact that everything's interconnected, and the problems of the developing world so often stem from the greed of the developed world, and everything was joining together, and making -- not sense, hope lies in sense, you said -- it's making a nonsense.
How can we do it?
Somebody said that yesterday.
And as I was traveling around, I kept meeting young people who'd lost hope.
They were feeling despair, they were feeling, "Well, it doesn't matter what we do; eat, drink and be merry, for tomorrow we die.
Everything is hopeless -- we're always being told so by the media."
And then I met some who were angry, and anger that can turn to violence, and we're all familiar with that.
And I have three little grandchildren, and when some of these students would say to me at high school or university, they'd say, "We're angry," or "We're filled with despair, because we feel you've compromised our future, and there's nothing we can do about it."
And I looked in the eyes of my little grandchildren, and think how much we've harmed this planet since I was their age.
I feel this deep shame, and that's why in 1991 in Tanzania, I started a program that's called Roots and Shoots.
There's little brochures all around outside, and if any of you have anything to do with children and care about their future, I beg that you pick up that brochure.
And Roots and Shoots is a program for hope.
Roots make a firm foundation.
Shoots seem tiny, but to reach the sun they can break through brick walls.
See the brick walls as all the problems that we've inflicted on this planet.
Then, you see, it is a message of hope.
Hundreds and thousands of young people around the world can break through, and can make this a better world.
And the most important message of Roots and Shoots is that every single individual makes a difference.
Every individual has a role to play.
Every one of us impacts the world around us everyday, and you scientists know that you can't actually -- even if you stay in bed all day, you're breathing oxygen and giving out CO2, and probably going to the loo, you're making a difference in the world.
So, the Roots and Shoots program involves youth in three kinds of projects.
And these are projects to make the world around them a better place.
One project to show care and concern for your own human community.
One for animals, including domestic animals -- and I have to say, I learned everything I know about animal behavior even before I got to Gombe and the chimps from my dog, Rusty, who was my childhood companion.
And the third kind of project: something for the local environment.
So what the kids do depends first of all, how old are they -- and we go now from pre-school right through university.
It's going to depend whether they're inner-city or rural.
It's going to depend if they're wealthy or impoverished.
It's going to depend which part, say, of America they're in.
We're in every state now, and the problems in Florida are different from the problems in New York.
It's going to depend on which country they're in -- and we're already in 60-plus countries, with about 5,000 active groups -- and there are groups all over the place that I keep hearing about that I've never even heard of, because the kids are taking the program and spreading it themselves.
Why?
Because they're buying into it, and they're the ones who get to decide what they're going to do.
It isn't something that their parents tell them, or their teachers tell them.
That's effective, but if they decide themselves, "We want to clean this river and put the fish back that used to be there.
We want to clear away the toxic soil from this area and have an organic garden.
We want to go and spend time with the old people and hear their stories and record their oral histories.
We want to go and work in a dog shelter.
We want to learn about animals. We want ... " You know, it goes on and on, and this is very hopeful for me.
As I travel around the world 300 days a year, everywhere there's a group of Roots and Shoots of different ages.
Everywhere there are children with shining eyes saying, "Look at the difference we've made."
And now comes the technology into it, because with this new way of communicating electronically these kids can communicate with each other around the world.
And if anyone is interested to help us, we've got so many ideas but we need help -- we need help to create the right kind of system that will help these young people to communicate their excitement.
But also -- and this is so important -- to communicate their despair, to say, "We've tried this and it doesn't work, and what shall we do?"
And then, lo and behold, there's another group answering these kids who may be in America, or maybe this is a group in Israel, saying, "Yeah, you did it a little bit wrong. This is how you should do it."
The philosophy is very simple.
We do not believe in violence.
No violence, no bombs, no guns.
That's not the way to solve problems.
Violence leads to violence, at least in my view.
So how do we solve?
The tools for solving the problems are knowledge and understanding.
Know the facts, but see how they fit in the big picture.
Hard work and persistence --don't give up -- and love and compassion leading to respect for all life.
How many more minutes? Two, one?
Chris Anderson: One -- one to two.
Jane Goodall: Two, two, I'm going to take two.
Are you going to come and drag me off?
Anyway -- so basically, Roots and Shoots is beginning to change young people's lives.
It's what I'm devoting most of my energy to.
And I believe that a group like this can have a very major impact, not just because you can share technology with us, but because so many of you have children.
And if you take this program out, and give it to your children, they have such a good opportunity to go out and do good, because they've got parents like you.
And it's been so clear how much you all care about trying to make this world a better place.
It's very encouraging.
But the kids do ask me -- and this won't take more than two minutes, I promise -- the kids say, "Dr. Jane, do you really have hope for the future?
You travel, you see all these horrible things happening."
Firstly, the human brain -- I don't need to say anything about that.
Now that we know what the problems are around the world, human brains like yours are rising to solve those problems.
And we've talked a lot about that.
Secondly, the resilience of nature.
We can destroy a river, and we can bring it back to life.
We can see a whole area desolated, and it can be brought back to bloom again, with time or a little help.
And thirdly, the last speaker talked about -- or the speaker before last, talked about the indomitable human spirit.
We are surrounded by the most amazing people who do things that seem to be absolutely impossible.
Nelson Mandela -- I take a little piece of limestone from Robben Island Prison, where he labored for 27 years, and came out with so little bitterness, he could lead his people from the horror of apartheid without a bloodbath.
Even after the 11th of September -- and I was in New York and I felt the fear -- nevertheless, there was so much human courage, so much love and so much compassion.
And then as I went around the country after that and felt the fear -- the fear that was leading to people feeling they couldn't worry about the environment any more, in case they seemed not to be patriotic -- and I was trying to encourage them, somebody came up with a little quotation from Mahatma Gandhi, "If you look back through human history, you see that every evil regime has been overcome by good."
And just after that a woman brought me this little bell, and I want to end on this note.
She said, "If you're talking about hope and peace, ring this.
This bell is made from metal from a defused landmine, from the killing fields of Pol Pot -- one of the most evil regimes in human history -- where people are now beginning to put their lives back together after the regime has crumbled.
So, yes, there is hope, and where is the hope?
Is it out there with the politicians?
It's in our hands.
It's in your hands and my hands and those of our children.
It's really up to us.
We're the ones who can make a difference.
If we lead lives where we consciously leave the lightest possible ecological footprints, if we buy the things that are ethical for us to buy and don't buy the things that are not, we can change the world overnight.
Thank you.
Thank you. It's really an honor and a privilege to be here spending my last day as a teenager.
Today I want to talk to you about the future, but first I'm going to tell you a bit about the past.
My story starts way before I was born.
My grandmother was on a train to Auschwitz, the death camp.
And she was going along the tracks, and the tracks split.
And somehow -- we don't really know exactly the whole story -- but the train took the wrong track and went to a work camp rather than the death camp.
My grandmother survived and married my grandfather.
They were living in Hungary, and my mother was born.
And when my mother was two years old, the Hungarian revolution was raging, and they decided to escape Hungary.
They got on a boat, and yet another divergence -- the boat was either going to Canada or to Australia.
They got on and didn't know where they were going, and ended up in Canada.
So, to make a long story short, they came to Canada.
My grandmother was a chemist. She worked at the Banting Institute in Toronto, and at 44 she died of stomach cancer. I never met my grandmother, but I carry on her name -- her exact name, Eva Vertes -- and I like to think I carry on her scientific passion, too.
I found this passion not far from here, actually, when I was nine years old.
My family was on a road trip and we were in the Grand Canyon.
And I had never been a reader when I was young -- my dad had tried me with the Hardy Boys; I tried Nancy Drew; I tried all that -- and I just didn't like reading books.
And my mother bought this book when we were at the Grand Canyon called "The Hot Zone." It was all about the outbreak of the Ebola virus.
And something about it just kind of drew me towards it.
There was this big sort of bumpy-looking virus on the cover, and I just wanted to read it. I picked up that book, and as we drove from the edge of the Grand Canyon to Big Sur, and to, actually, here where we are today, in Monterey, I read that book, and from when I was reading that book, I knew that I wanted to have a life in medicine.
I wanted to be like the explorers I'd read about in the book, who went into the jungles of Africa, went into the research labs and just tried to figure out what this deadly virus was. So from that moment on, I read every medical book I could get my hands on, and I just loved it so much.
I was a passive observer of the medical world.
It wasn't until I entered high school that I thought, "Maybe now, you know -- being a big high school kid -- I can maybe become an active part of this big medical world."
I was 14, and I emailed professors at the local university to see if maybe I could go work in their lab. And hardly anyone responded.
But I mean, why would they respond to a 14-year-old, anyway?
And I got to go talk to one professor, Dr. Jacobs, who accepted me into the lab.
At that time, I was really interested in neuroscience and wanted to do a research project in neurology -- specifically looking at the effects of heavy metals on the developing nervous system.
So I started that, and worked in his lab for a year, and found the results that I guess you'd expect to find when you feed fruit flies heavy metals -- that it really, really impaired the nervous system.
The spinal cord had breaks. The neurons were crossing in every which way.
And from then I wanted to look not at impairment, but at prevention of impairment.
So that's what led me to Alzheimer's. I started reading about Alzheimer's and tried to familiarize myself with the research, and at the same time when I was in the -- I was reading in the medical library one day, and I read this article about something called "purine derivatives."
And they seemed to have cell growth-promoting properties.
And being naive about the whole field, I kind of thought, "Oh, you have cell death in Alzheimer's which is causing the memory deficit, and then you have this compound -- purine derivatives -- that are promoting cell growth."
And so I thought, "Maybe if it can promote cell growth, it can inhibit cell death, too."
And so that's the project that I pursued for that year, and it's continuing now as well, and found that a specific purine derivative called "guanidine" had inhibited the cell growth by approximately 60 percent.
So I presented those results at the International Science Fair, which was just one of the most amazing experiences of my life.
And there I was awarded "Best in the World in Medicine," which allowed me to get in, or at least get a foot in the door of the big medical world.
And from then on, since I was now in this huge exciting world, I wanted to explore it all. I wanted it all at once, but knew I couldn't really get that.
And I stumbled across something called "cancer stem cells."
And this is really what I want to talk to you about today -- about cancer.
At first when I heard of cancer stem cells, I didn't really know how to put the two together. I'd heard of stem cells, and I'd heard of them as the panacea of the future -- the therapy of many diseases to come in the future, perhaps.
But I'd heard of cancer as the most feared disease of our time, so how did the good and bad go together?
Last summer I worked at Stanford University, doing some research on cancer stem cells.
And while I was doing this, I was reading the cancer literature, trying to -- again -- familiarize myself with this new medical field.
And it seemed that tumors actually begin from a stem cell.
This fascinated me. The more I read, the more I looked at cancer differently and almost became less fearful of it.
It seems that cancer is a direct result to injury.
If you smoke, you damage your lung tissue, and then lung cancer arises.
If you drink, you damage your liver, and then liver cancer occurs.
And it was really interesting -- there were articles correlating if you have a bone fracture, and then bone cancer arises.
Because what stem cells are -- they're these phenomenal cells that really have the ability to differentiate into any type of tissue.
So, if the body is sensing that you have damage to an organ and then it's initiating cancer, it's almost as if this is a repair response.
And the cancer, the body is saying the lung tissue is damaged, we need to repair the lung. And cancer is originating in the lung trying to repair -- because you have this excessive proliferation of these remarkable cells that really have the potential to become lung tissue.
But it's almost as if the body has originated this ingenious response, but can't quite control it.
It hasn't yet become fine-tuned enough to finish what has been initiated.
So this really, really fascinated me.
And I really think that we can't think about cancer -- let alone any disease -- in such black-and-white terms.
If we eliminate cancer the way we're trying to do now, with chemotherapy and radiation, we're bombarding the body or the cancer with toxins, or with radiation, trying to kill it.
It's almost as if we're getting back to this starting point.
We're removing the cancer cells, but we're revealing the previous damage that the body has tried to fix.
Shouldn't we think about manipulation, rather than elimination?
If somehow we can cause these cells to differentiate -- to become bone tissue, lung tissue, liver tissue, whatever that cancer has been put there to do -- it would be a repair process. We'd end up better than we were before cancer.
So, this really changed my view of looking at cancer.
And while I was reading all these articles about cancer, it seemed that the articles -- a lot of them -- focused on, you know, the genetics of breast cancer, and the genesis and the progression of breast cancer -- tracking the cancer through the body, tracing where it is, where it goes.
But it struck me that I'd never heard of cancer of the heart, or cancer of any skeletal muscle for that matter.
And skeletal muscle constitutes 50 percent of our body, or over 50 percent of our body. And so at first I kind of thought, "Well, maybe there's some obvious explanation why skeletal muscle doesn't get cancer -- at least not that I know of."
So, I looked further into it, found as many articles as I could, and it was amazing -- because it turned out that it was very rare.
Some articles even went as far as to say that skeletal muscle tissue is resistant to cancer, and furthermore, not only to cancer, but of metastases going to skeletal muscle.
And what metastases are is when the tumor -- when a piece -- breaks off and travels through the blood stream and goes to a different organ. That's what a metastasis is.
It's the part of cancer that is the most dangerous.
If cancer was localized, we could likely remove it, or somehow -- you know, it's contained. It's very contained.
But once it starts moving throughout the body, that's when it becomes deadly.
So the fact that not only did cancer not seem to originate in skeletal muscles, but cancer didn't seem to go to skeletal muscle -- there seemed to be something here.
So these articles were saying, you know, "Skeletal -- metastasis to skeletal muscle -- is very rare."
But it was left at that. No one seemed to be asking why.
So I decided to ask why. At first -- the first thing I did was I emailed some professors who specialized in skeletal muscle physiology, and pretty much said, "Hey, it seems like cancer doesn't really go to skeletal muscle.
Is there a reason for this?" And a lot of the replies I got were that muscle is terminally differentiated tissue.
Meaning that you have muscle cells, but they're not dividing, so it doesn't seem like a good target for cancer to hijack.
But then again, this fact that the metastases didn't go to skeletal muscle made that seem unlikely.
And furthermore, that nervous tissue -- brain -- gets cancer, and brain cells are also terminally differentiated.
So I decided to ask why. And here's some of, I guess, my hypotheses that I'll be starting to investigate this May at the Sylvester Cancer Institute in Miami.
And I guess I'll keep investigating until I get the answers.
But I know that in science, once you get the answers, inevitably you're going to have more questions.
So I guess you could say that I'll probably be doing this for the rest of my life.
Some of my hypotheses are that when you first think about skeletal muscle, there's a lot of blood vessels going to skeletal muscle.
And the first thing that makes me think is that blood vessels are like highways for the tumor cells.
Tumor cells can travel through the blood vessels.
And you think, the more highways there are in a tissue, the more likely it is to get cancer or to get metastases.
So first of all I thought, you know, "Wouldn't it be favorable to cancer getting to skeletal muscle?" And as well, cancer tumors require a process called angiogenesis, which is really, the tumor recruits the blood vessels to itself to supply itself with nutrients so it can grow.
Without angiogenesis, the tumor remains the size of a pinpoint and it's not harmful.
So angiogenesis is really a central process to the pathogenesis of cancer.
And one article that really stood out to me when I was just reading about this, trying to figure out why cancer doesn't go to skeletal muscle, was that it had reported 16 percent of micro-metastases to skeletal muscle upon autopsy.
16 percent! Meaning that there were these pinpoint tumors in skeletal muscle, but only .16 percent of actual metastases -- suggesting that maybe skeletal muscle is able to control the angiogenesis, is able to control the tumors recruiting these blood vessels.
We use skeletal muscles so much. It's the one portion of our body -- our heart's always beating. We're always moving our muscles.
Is it possible that muscle somehow intuitively knows that it needs this blood supply? It needs to be constantly contracting, so therefore it's almost selfish. It's grabbing its blood vessels for itself.
Therefore, when a tumor comes into skeletal muscle tissue, it can't get a blood supply, and can't grow.
So this suggests that maybe if there is an anti-angiogenic factor in skeletal muscle -- or perhaps even more, an angiogenic routing factor, so it can actually direct where the blood vessels grow -- this could be a potential future therapy for cancer.
And another thing that's really interesting is that there's this whole -- the way tumors move throughout the body, it's a very complex system -- and there's something called the chemokine network.
And chemokines are essentially chemical attractants, and they're the stop and go signals for cancer.
So a tumor expresses chemokine receptors, and another organ -- a distant organ somewhere in the body -- will have the corresponding chemokines, and the tumor will see these chemokines and migrate towards it.
Is it possible that skeletal muscle doesn't express this type of molecules?
And the other really interesting thing is that when skeletal muscle -- there's been several reports that when skeletal muscle is injured, that's what correlates with metastases going to skeletal muscle.
And, furthermore, when skeletal muscle is injured, that's what causes chemokines -- these signals saying, "Cancer, you can come to me," the "go signs" for the tumors -- it causes them to highly express these chemokines.
So, there's so much interplay here.
I mean, there are so many possibilities for why tumors don't go to skeletal muscle.
But it seems like by investigating, by attacking cancer, by searching where cancer is not, there has got to be something -- there's got to be something -- that's making this tissue resistant to tumors.
And can we utilize -- can we take this property, this compound, this receptor, whatever it is that's controlling these anti-tumor properties and apply it to cancer therapy in general?
Now, one thing that kind of ties the resistance of skeletal muscle to cancer -- to the cancer as a repair response gone out of control in the body -- is that skeletal muscle has a factor in it called "MyoD."
And what MyoD essentially does is, it causes cells to differentiate into muscle cells. So this compound, MyoD, has been tested on a lot of different cell types and been shown to actually convert this variety of cell types into skeletal muscle cells.
So, is it possible that the tumor cells are going to the skeletal muscle tissue, but once in contact inside the skeletal muscle tissue, MyoD acts upon these tumor cells and causes them to become skeletal muscle cells?
Maybe tumor cells are being disguised as skeletal muscle cells, and this is why it seems as if it is so rare.
It's not harmful; it has just repaired the muscle.
Muscle is constantly being used -- constantly being damaged.
If every time we tore a muscle or every time we stretched a muscle or moved in a wrong way, cancer occurred -- I mean, everybody would have cancer almost.
And I hate to say that. But it seems as though muscle cell, possibly because of all its use, has adapted faster than other body tissues to respond to injury, to fine-tune this repair response and actually be able to finish the process which the body wants to finish. I really believe that the human body is very, very smart, and we can't counteract something the body is saying to do.
It's different when a bacteria comes into the body -- that's a foreign object -- we want that out.
But when the body is actually initiating a process and we're calling it a disease, it doesn't seem as though elimination is the right solution. So even to go from there, it's possible, although far-fetched, that in the future we could almost think of cancer being used as a therapy.
If those diseases where tissues are deteriorating -- for example Alzheimer's, where the brain, the brain cells, die and we need to restore new brain cells, new functional brain cells -- what if we could, in the future, use cancer? A tumor -- put it in the brain and cause it to differentiate into brain cells?
That's a very far-fetched idea, but I really believe that it may be possible.
These cells are so versatile, these cancer cells are so versatile -- we just have to manipulate them in the right way.
And again, some of these may be far-fetched, but I figured if there's anywhere to present far-fetched ideas, it's here at TED, so thank you very much.
Frank Gehry: I listened to this scientist this morning.
Dr. Mullis was talking about his experiments, and I realized that I almost became a scientist.
When I was 14 my parents bought me a chemistry set and I decided to make water.
So, I made a hydrogen generator and I made an oxygen generator, and I had the two pipes leading into a beaker and I threw a match in.
And the glass -- luckily I turned around -- I had it all in my back and I was about 15 feet away.
The wall was covered with ...
I had an explosion.
Richard Saul Wurman: Really?
FG: People on the street came and knocked on the door to see if I was okay.
RSW: ... huh.  I'd like to start this session again.
The gentleman to my left is the very famous, perhaps overly famous, Frank Gehry.
And Frank, you've come to a place in your life, which is astonishing.
I mean it is astonishing for an artist, for an architect, to become actually an icon and a legend in their own time.
I mean you have become, whether you can giggle at it because it's a funny ... you know, it's a strange thought, but your building is an icon -- you can draw a little picture of that building, it can be used in ads -- and you've had not rock star status, but celebrity status in doing what you wanted to do for most of your life.
And I know the road was extremely difficult.
And it didn't seem, at least, that your sell outs, whatever they were, were very big.
You kept moving ahead in a life where you're dependent on working for somebody.
But that's an interesting thing for a creative person.
A lot of us work for people; we're in the hands of other people.
And that's one of the great dilemmas -- we're in a creativity session -- it's one of the great dilemmas in creativity: how to do work that's big enough and not sell out.
And you've achieved that and that makes your win doubly big, triply big.
It's not quite a question but you can comment on it.
It's a big issue.
FG: Well, I've always just ...
I've never really gone out looking for work.
I always waited for it to sort of hit me on the head.
And when I started out, I thought that architecture was a service business and that you had to please the clients and stuff.
And I realized when I'd come into the meetings with these corrugated metal and chain link stuff, and people would just look at me like I'd just landed from Mars.
But I couldn't do anything else.
That was my response to the people in the time.
And actually, it was responding to clients that I had who didn't have very much money, so they couldn't afford very much.
I think it was circumstantial.
Until I got to my house, where the client was my wife.
We bought this tiny little bungalow in Santa Monica and for like 50 grand I built a house around it.
And a few people got excited about it.
I was visiting with an artist, Michael Heizer, out in the desert near Las Vegas somewhere.
He's building this huge concrete place.
And it was late in the evening. We'd had a lot to drink.
We were standing out in the desert all alone and, thinking about my house, he said, "Did it ever occur to you if you built stuff more permanent, somewhere in 2000 years somebody's going to like it?"
So, I thought, "Yeah, that's probably a good idea."
Luckily I started to get some clients that had a little more money, so the stuff was a little more permanent.
But I just found out the world ain't going to last that long, this guy was telling us the other day.
So where do we go now?
Back to -- everything's so temporary.
I don't see it the way you characterized it.
For me, every day is a new thing.
I approach each project with a new insecurity, almost like the first project I ever did, and I get the sweats, I go in and start working, I'm not sure where I'm going -- if I knew where I was going, I wouldn't do it.
When I can predict or plan it, I don't do it.
I discard it.
So I approach it with the same trepidation.
Obviously, over time I have a lot more confidence that it's going to be OK.
I do run a kind of a business -- I've got 120 people and you've got to pay them, so there's a lot of responsibility involved -- but the actual work on the project is with, I think, a healthy insecurity.
And like the playwright said the other day -- I could relate to him: you're not sure.
When Bilbao was finished and I looked at it, I saw all the mistakes, I saw ...
They weren't mistakes; I saw everything that I would have changed and I was embarrassed by it.
I felt an embarrassment -- "How could I have done that?
How could I have made shapes like that or done stuff like that?"
It's taken several years to now look at it detached and say -- as you walk around the corner and a piece of it works with the road and the street, and it appears to have a relationship -- that I started to like it.
RSW: What's the status of the New York project?
FG: I don't really know.
Tom Krens came to me with Bilbao and explained it all to me, and I thought he was nuts.
I didn't think he knew what he was doing, and he pulled it off.
So, I think he's Icarus and Phoenix all in one guy.
He gets up there and then he ... comes back up.
They're still talking about it.
September 11 generated some interest in moving it over to Ground Zero, and I'm totally against that.
I just feel uncomfortable talking about or building anything on Ground Zero I think for a long time.
RSW: The picture on the screen, is that Disney?
FG: Yeah.
RSW: How much further along is it than that, and when will that be finished?
FG: That will be finished in 2003 -- September, October -- and I'm hoping Kyu, and Herbie, and Yo-Yo and all those guys come play with us at that place.
Luckily, today most of the people I'm working with are people I really like.
Richard Koshalek is probably one of the main reasons that Disney Hall came to me.
He's been a cheerleader for quite a long time.
There aren't many people around that are really involved with architecture as clients.
If you think about the world, and even just in this audience, most of us are involved with buildings.
Nothing that you would call architecture, right?
And so to find one, a guy like that, you hang on to him.
He's become the head of Art Center, and there's a building by Craig Ellwood there.
I knew Craig and respected him.
They want to add to it and it's hard to add to a building like that -- it's a beautiful, minimalist, black steel building -- and Richard wants to add a library and more student stuff and it's a lot of acreage.
I convinced him to let me bring in another architect from Portugal: Alvaro Siza.
RSW: Why did you want that?
FG: I knew you'd ask that question.
It was intuitive.
Alvaro Siza grew up and lived in Portugal and is probably considered the Portuguese main guy in architecture.
I visited with him a few years ago and he showed me his early work, and his early work had a resemblance to my early work.
When I came out of college, I started to try to do things contextually in Southern California, and you got into the logic of Spanish colonial tile roofs and things like that.
I tried to understand that language as a beginning, as a place to jump off, and there was so much of it being done by spec builders and it was trivialized so much that it wasn't ...
I just stopped.
I mean, Charlie Moore did a bunch of it, but it didn't feel good to me.
Siza, on the other hand, continued in Portugal where the real stuff was and evolved a modern language that relates to that historic language.
And I always felt that he should come to Southern California and do a building.
I tried to get him a couple of jobs and they didn't pan out.
I like the idea of collaboration with people like that because it pushes you.
I've done it with Claes Oldenburg and with Richard Serra, who doesn't think architecture is art.
Did you see that thing?
RSW: No. What did he say?
FG: He calls architecture "plumbing."
FG: Anyway, the Siza thing.
It's a richer experience.
It must be like that for Kyu doing things with musicians -- it's similar to that I would imagine -- where you ... huh?
Audience: Liquid architecture.
FG: Liquid architecture.
Where you ... It's like jazz: you improvise, you work together, you play off each other, you make something, they make something.
And I think for me, it's a way of trying to understand the city and what might happen in the city.
RSW: Is it going to be near the current campus?
Or is it going to be down near ...
FG: No, it's near the current campus.
Anyway, he's that kind of patron.
It's not his money, of course.
RSW: What's his schedule on that?
FG: I don't know.
What's the schedule, Richard?
Richard Koshalek: [Unclear] starts from 2004.
FG: 2004.
You can come to the opening. I'll invite you.
No, but the issue of city building in democracy is interesting because it creates chaos, right?
Everybody doing their thing makes a very chaotic environment, and if you can figure out how to work off each other -- if you can get a bunch of people who respect each other's work and play off each other, you might be able to create models for how to build sections of the city without resorting to the one architect.
Like the Rockefeller Center model, which is kind of from another era.
RSW: I found the most remarkable thing.
My preconception of Bilbao was this wonderful building, you go inside and there'd be extraordinary spaces.
I'd seen drawings you had presented here at TED.
The surprise of Bilbao was in its context to the city.
That was the surprise of going across the river, of going on the highway around it, of walking down the street and finding it.
That was the real surprise of Bilbao.
FG: But you know, Richard, most architects when they present their work -- most of the people we know, you get up and you talk about your work, and it's almost like you tell everybody you're a good guy by saying, "Look, I'm worried about the context, I'm worried about the city, I'm worried about my client, I worry about budget, that I'm on time."
Blah, blah, blah and all that stuff.
And it's like cleansing yourself so that you can ...
by saying all that, it means your work is good somehow.
And I think everybody -- I mean that should be a matter of fact, like gravity.
You're not going to defy gravity.
You've got to work with the building department.
If you don't meet the budgets, you're not going to get much work.
If it leaks -- Bilbao did not leak.
I was so proud.
The MIT project -- they were interviewing me for MIT and they sent their facilities people to Bilbao.
I met them in Bilbao.
They came for three days.
RSW: This is the computer building?
FG: Yeah, the computer building.
They were there three days and it rained every day and they kept walking around -- I noticed they were looking under things and looking for things, and they wanted to know where the buckets were hidden, you know?
People put buckets out ...
I was clean. There wasn't a bloody leak in the place, it was just fantastic.
But you've got to -- yeah, well up until then every building leaked, so this ...
RSW: Frank had a sort of ...
FG: Ask Miriam!
RW: ... sort of had a fame. His fame was built on that in L.A. for a while.
FG: You've all heard the Frank Lloyd Wright story, when the woman called and said, "Mr. Wright, I'm sitting on the couch and the water's pouring in on my head."
And he said, "Madam, move your chair."
So, some years later I was doing a building, a little house on the beach for Norton Simon, and his secretary, who was kind of a hell on wheels type lady, called me and said, "Mr. Simon's sitting at his desk and the water's coming in on his head."
And I told her the Frank Lloyd Wright story.
RSW: Didn't get a laugh.
FG: No. Not now either.
But my point is that ... and I call it the "then what?"
OK, you solved all the problems, you did all the stuff, you made nice, you loved your clients, you loved the city, you're a good guy, you're a good person ...
and then what?
What do you bring to it?
And I think that's what I've always been interested in, is that -- which is a personal kind of expression.
Bilbao, I think, shows that you can have that kind of personal expression and still touch all the bases that are necessary of fitting into the city.
That's what reminded me of it.
And I think that's the issue, you know; it's the "then what" that most clients who hire architects -- most clients aren't hiring architects for that.
They're hiring them to get it done, get it on budget, be polite, and they're missing out on the real value of an architect.
RSW: At a certain point a number of years ago, people -- when Michael Graves was a fashion, before teapots ...
FG: I did a teapot and nobody bought it.
RSW: Did it leak?
FG: No.
RSW: ... people wanted a Michael Graves building.
Is that a curse, that people want a Bilbao building?
FG: Yeah.
Since Bilbao opened, which is now four, five years, both Krens and I have been called with at least 100 opportunities -- China, Brazil, other parts of Spain -- to come in and do the Bilbao effect.
And I've met with some of these people.
Usually I say no right away, but some of them come with pedigree and they sound well-intentioned and they get you for at least one or two meetings.
In one case, I flew all the way to Malaga with a team because the thing was signed with seals and various very official seals from the city, and that they wanted me to come and do a building in their port.
I asked them what kind of building it was.
"When you get here we'll explain it." Blah, blah, blah.
So four of us went.
And they took us -- they put us up in a great hotel and we were looking over the bay, and then they took us in a boat out in the water and showed us all these sights in the harbor.
Each one was more beautiful than the other.
And then we were going to have lunch with the mayor and we were going to have dinner with the most important people in Malaga.
Just before going to lunch with the mayor, we went to the harbor commissioner.
It was a table as long as this carpet and the harbor commissioner was here, and I was here, and my guys.
We sat down, and we had a drink of water and everybody was quiet.
And the guy looked at me and said, "Now what can I do for you, Mr. Gehry?"
RSW: Oh, my God.
FG: So, I got up.
I said to my team, "Let's get out of here."
We stood up, we walked out.
They followed -- the guy that dragged us there followed us and he said, "You mean you're not going to have lunch with the mayor?"
I said, "Nope."
"You're not going to have dinner at all?"
They just brought us there to hustle this group, you know, to create a project.
And we get a lot of that.
Luckily, I'm old enough that I can complain I can't travel.
I don't have my own plane yet.
RSW: Well, I'm going to wind this up and wind up the meeting because it's been very long.
But let me just say a couple words.
FG: Can I say something?
Are you going to talk about me or you?
RSW: Once a shit, always a shit!
FG: Because I want to get a standing ovation like everybody, so ...
RSW: You're going to get one! You're going to get one!
I'm going to make it for you!
FG: No, no. Wait a minute!
Imagine spending seven years at MIT and research laboratories, only to find out that you're a performance artist.
I'm also a software engineer, and I make lots of different kinds of art with the computer.
And I think the main thing that I'm interested in is trying to find a way of making the computer into a personal mode of expression.
And many of you out there are the heads of Macromedia and Microsoft, and in a way those are my bane: I think there's a great homogenizing force that software imposes on people and limits the way they think about what's possible on the computer.
Of course, it's also a great liberating force that makes possible, you know, publishing and so forth, and standards, and so on.
But, in a way, the computer makes possible much more than what most people think, and my art has just been about trying to find a personal way of using the computer, and so I end up writing software to do that.
Chris has asked me to do a short performance, and so I'm going to take just this time -- maybe 10 minutes -- to do that, and hopefully at the end have just a moment to show you a couple of my other projects in video form.
Thank you.
We've got about a minute left.
I'd just like to show a clip from a most recent project.
I did a performance with two singers who specialize in making strange noises with their mouths.
And this just came off last September at ARS Electronica; we repeated it in England.
And the idea is to visualize their speech and song behind them with a large screen.
We used a computer vision tracking system in order to know where they were.
And since we know where their heads are, and we have a wireless mic on them that we're processing the sound from, we're able to create visualizations which are linked very tightly to what they're doing with their speech.
This will take about 30 seconds or so.
He's making a, kind of, cheek-flapping sound.
Well, suffice it to say it's not all like that, but that's part of it.
Thanks very much. There's always lots more.
I'm overtime, so I just wanted to say you can, if you're in New York, you can check out my work at the Whitney Biennial next week, and also at Bitforms Gallery in Chelsea.
And with that, I think I should give up the stage, so, thank you so much.
I'd like to talk today about the two biggest social trends in the coming century, and perhaps in the next 10,000 years.
But I want to start with my work on romantic love, because that's my most recent work.
What I and my colleagues did was put 32 people, who were madly in love, into a functional MRI brain scanner.
17 who were madly in love and their love was accepted; and 15 who were madly in love and they had just been dumped.
And so I want to tell you about that first, and then go on into where I think love is going.
"What 'tis to love?" Shakespeare said.
I think our ancestors -- I think human beings have been wondering about this question since they sat around their campfires or lay and watched the stars a million years ago.
I started out by trying to figure out what romantic love was by looking at the last 45 years of the psychological research and as it turns out, there's a very specific group of things that happen when you fall in love.
The first thing that happens is, a person begins to take on what I call, "special meaning."
As a truck driver once said to me, "The world had a new center, and that center was Mary Anne."
George Bernard Shaw said it differently.
"Love consists of overestimating the differences between one woman and another."
And indeed, that's what we do.
And then you just focus on this person.
You can list what you don't like about them, but then you sweep that aside and focus on what you do.
As Chaucer said, "Love is blind."
In trying to understand romantic love, I decided I would read poetry from all over the world, and I just want to give you one very short poem from eighth-century China, because it's an almost perfect example of a man who is focused totally on a particular woman.
It's a little bit like when you are madly in love with somebody and you walk into a parking lot -- their car is different from every other car in the parking lot.
Their wine glass at dinner is different from every other wine glass at the dinner party.
And in this case, a man got hooked on a bamboo sleeping mat.
And it goes like this. It's by a guy called Yuan Zhen.
"I cannot bear to put away the bamboo sleeping mat.
The night I brought you home, I watched you roll it out."
He became hooked on a sleeping mat, probably because of elevated activity of dopamine in his brain, just like with you and me.
But anyway, not only does this person take on special meaning, you focus your attention on them.
You aggrandize them. But you have intense energy.
As one Polynesian said, "I felt like jumping in the sky."
You're up all night. You're walking till dawn.
You feel intense elation when things are going well; mood swings into horrible despair when things are going poorly.
Real dependence on this person.
As one businessman in New York said to me, "Anything she liked, I liked."
Simple. Romantic love is very simple.
You become extremely sexually possessive.
You know, if you're just sleeping with somebody casually, you don't really care if they're sleeping with somebody else.
But the moment you fall in love, you become extremely sexually possessive of them.
I think there's a Darwinian purpose to this.
The whole point of this is to pull two people together strongly enough to begin to rear babies as a team.
But the main characteristics of romantic love are craving: an intense craving to be with a particular person, not just sexually, but emotionally.
It would be nice to go to bed with them, but you want them to call you on the telephone, to invite you out, etc., to tell you that they love you.
The other main characteristic is motivation.
The motor in the brain begins to crank, and you want this person.
And last but not least, it is an obsession.
Before I put these people in the MRI machine, I would ask them all kinds of questions.
But my most important question was always the same.
It was: "What percentage of the day and night do you think about this person?"
And indeed, they would say, "All day. All night. I can never stop thinking about him or her."
And then, the very last question -- I would always have to work myself up to this question, because I'm not a psychologist.
I don't work with people in any kind of traumatic situation.
My final question was always the same.
I would say, "Would you die for him or her?"
And, indeed, these people would say "Yes!"
as if I had asked them to pass the salt.
I was just staggered by it. So we scanned their brains, looking at a photograph of their sweetheart and looking at a neutral photograph, with a distraction task in between.
So we could look at the same brain when it was in that heightened state and when it was in a resting state.
And we found activity in a lot of brain regions.
In fact, one of the most important was a brain region that becomes active when you feel the rush of cocaine.
And indeed, that's exactly what happens.
I began to realize that romantic love is not an emotion.
In fact, I had always thought it was a series of emotions, from very high to very low.
But actually, it's a drive. It comes from the motor of the mind, the wanting part of the mind, the craving part of the mind.
The kind of part of the mind when you're reaching for that piece of chocolate, when you want to win that promotion at work.
The motor of the brain. It's a drive.
And in fact, I think it's more powerful than the sex drive.
You know, if you ask somebody to go to bed with you, and they say, "No, thank you," you certainly don't kill yourself or slip into a clinical depression.
But certainly, around the world, people who are rejected in love will kill for it.
People live for love. They kill for love. They die for love.
They have songs, poems, novels, sculptures, paintings, myths, legends.
In over 175 societies, people have left their evidence of this powerful brain system.
I have come to think it's one of the most powerful brain systems on Earth for both great joy and great sorrow.
And I've also come to think that it's one of three basically different brain systems that evolved from mating and reproduction.
One is the sex drive: the craving for sexual gratification.
W.H. Auden called it an "intolerable neural itch," and indeed, that's what it is.
It keeps bothering you a little bit, like being hungry.
The second of these three brain systems is romantic love: that elation, obsession of early love.
And the third brain system is attachment: that sense of calm and security you can feel for a long-term partner.
And I think that the sex drive evolved to get you out there, looking for a whole range of partners.
You can feel it when you're just driving along in your car.
It can be focused on nobody.
I think romantic love evolved to enable you to focus your mating energy on just one individual at a time, thereby conserving mating time and energy.
And I think that attachment, the third brain system, evolved to enable you to tolerate this human being at least long enough to raise a child together as a team.
So with that preamble, I want to go into discussing the two most profound social trends.
One of the last 10,000 years and the other, certainly of the last 25 years, that are going to have an impact on these three different brain systems: lust, romantic love and deep attachment to a partner.
The first is women working, moving into the workforce.
I've looked at 130 societies through the demographic yearbooks of the United Nations.
Everywhere in the world, 129 out of 130 of them, women are not only moving into the job market -- sometimes very, very slowly, but they are moving into the job market -- and they are very slowly closing that gap between men and women in terms of economic power, health and education.
It's very slow.
For every trend on this planet, there's a counter-trend.
We all know of them, but nevertheless -- the Arabs say, "The dogs may bark, but the caravan moves on."
And, indeed, that caravan is moving on.
Women are moving back into the job market.
And I say back into the job market, because this is not new.
For millions of years, on the grasslands of Africa, women commuted to work to gather their vegetables.
They came home with 60 to 80 percent of the evening meal.
The double income family was the standard.
And women were regarded as just as economically, socially and sexually powerful as men.
In short, we're really moving forward to the past.
Then, women's worst invention was the plow.
With the beginning of plow agriculture, men's roles became extremely powerful.
Women lost their ancient jobs as collectors, but then with the industrial revolution and the post-industrial revolution they're moving back into the job market.
In short, they are acquiring the status that they had a million years ago, 10,000 years ago, 100,000 years ago.
We are seeing now one of the most remarkable traditions in the history of the human animal. And it's going to have an impact.
I generally give a whole lecture on the impact of women on the business community.
I'll say just a couple of things, and then go on to sex and love.
There's a lot of gender differences; anybody who thinks men and women are alike simply never had a boy and a girl child.
I don't know why they want to think that men and women are alike.
There's much we have in common, but there's a whole lot that we do not have in common.
We are -- in the words of Ted Hughes, "I think that we are like two feet. We need each other to get ahead."
But we did not evolve to have the same brain.
And we're finding more and more gender differences in the brain.
I'll only just use a couple and then move on to sex and love.
One of them is women's verbal ability. Women can talk.
Women's ability to find the right word rapidly, basic articulation goes up in the middle of the menstrual cycle, when estrogen levels peak.
But even at menstruation, they're better than the average man.
Women can talk.
They've been doing it for a million years; words were women's tools.
They held that baby in front of their face, cajoling it, reprimanding it, educating it with words.
And, indeed, they're becoming a very powerful force.
Even in places like India and Japan, where women are not moving rapidly into the regular job market, they're moving into journalism.
And I think that the television is like the global campfire.
We sit around it and it shapes our minds.
Almost always, when I'm on TV, the producer who calls me, who negotiates what we're going to say, is a woman.
In fact, Solzhenitsyn once said, "To have a great writer is to have another government."
Today 54 percent of people who are writers in America are women.
It's one of many, many characteristics that women have that they will bring into the job market.
They've got incredible people skills, negotiating skills.
They're highly imaginative.
We now know the brain circuitry of imagination, of long-term planning.
They tend to be web thinkers.
Because the female parts of the brain are better connected, they tend to collect more pieces of data when they think, put them into more complex patterns, see more options and outcomes.
They tend to be contextual, holistic thinkers, what I call web thinkers.
Men tend to -- and these are averages -- tend to get rid of what they regard as extraneous, focus on what they do, and move in a more step-by-step thinking pattern.
They're both perfectly good ways of thinking.
We need both of them to get ahead.
In fact, there's many more male geniuses in the world.
And there's also many more male idiots in the world.
When the male brain works well, it works extremely well.
And what I really think that we're doing is, we're moving towards a collaborative society, a society in which the talents of both men and women are becoming understood and valued and employed.
But in fact, women moving into the job market is having a huge impact on sex and romance and family life.
Foremost, women are starting to express their sexuality.
I'm always astonished when people come to me and say, "Why is it that men are so adulterous?"
"Why do you think more men are adulterous than women?"
"Well, men are more adulterous!"
And I say, "Who do you think these men are sleeping with?"
And -- basic math!
Anyway.
In the Western world, women start sooner at sex, have more partners, express less remorse for the partners that they do, marry later, have fewer children, leave bad marriages in order to get good ones.
We are seeing the rise of female sexual expression.
And, indeed, once again we're moving forward to the kind of sexual expression that we probably saw on the grasslands of Africa a million years ago, because this is the kind of sexual expression that we see in hunting and gathering societies today.
We're also returning to an ancient form of marriage equality.
They're now saying that the 21st century is going to be the century of what they call the "symmetrical marriage," or the "pure marriage," or the "companionate marriage."
This is a marriage between equals, moving forward to a pattern that is highly compatible with the ancient human spirit.
We're also seeing a rise of romantic love.
91 percent of American women and 86 percent of American men would not marry somebody who had every single quality they were looking for in a partner, if they were not in love with that person.
People around the world, in a study of 37 societies, want to be in love with the person that they marry.
Indeed, arranged marriages are on their way off this braid of human life.
I even think that marriages might even become more stable because of the second great world trend.
The first one being women moving into the job market, the second one being the aging world population.
They're now saying that in America, that middle age should be regarded as up to age 85.
Because in that highest age category of 76 to 85, as much as 40 percent of people have nothing really wrong with them.
So we're seeing there's a real extension of middle age.
For one of my books, I looked at divorce data in 58 societies.
And as it turns out, the older you get, the less likely you are to divorce.
So the divorce rate right now is stable in America, and it's actually beginning to decline.
It may decline some more.
I would even say that with Viagra, estrogen replacement, hip replacements and the incredibly interesting women -- women have never been as interesting as they are now.
Not at any time on this planet have women been so educated, so interesting, so capable.
And so I honestly think that if there really was ever a time in human evolution when we have the opportunity to make good marriages, that time is now.
However, there's always kinds of complications in this.
These three brain systems -- lust, romantic love and attachment -- don't always go together.
They can go together, by the way.
That's why casual sex isn't so casual.
With orgasm you get a spike of dopamine.
Dopamine's associated with romantic love, and you can just fall in love with somebody who you're just having casual sex with.
With orgasm, then you get a real rush of oxytocin and vasopressin -- those are associated with attachment.
This is why you can feel such a sense of cosmic union with somebody after you've made love to them.
But these three brain systems: lust, romantic love and attachment, aren't always connected to each other.
You can feel deep attachment to a long-term partner while you feel intense romantic love for somebody else, while you feel the sex drive for people unrelated to these other partners.
In short, we're capable of loving more than one person at a time.
In fact, you can lie in bed at night and swing from deep feelings of attachment for one person to deep feelings of romantic love for somebody else.
It's as if there's a committee meeting going on in your head as you are trying to decide what to do.
So I don't think, honestly, we're an animal that was built to be happy; we are an animal that was built to reproduce.
I think the happiness we find, we make.
And I think, however, we can make good relationships with each other.
So I want to conclude with two things.
I want to conclude with a worry, and with a wonderful story.
The worry is about antidepressants.
Over 100 million prescriptions of antidepressants are written every year in the United States.
And these drugs are going generic.
They are seeping around the world.
I know one girl who's been on these antidepressants, SSRIs, serotonin-enhancing antidepressants -- since she was 13.
She's 23. She's been on them ever since she was 13.
I've got nothing against people who take them short term, when they're going through something horrible.
They want to commit suicide or kill somebody else.
I would recommend it.
But more and more people in the United States are taking them long term.
And indeed, what these drugs do is raise levels of serotonin.
And by raising levels of serotonin, you suppress the dopamine circuit.
Everybody knows that.
Dopamine is associated with romantic love.
Not only do they suppress the dopamine circuit, but they kill the sex drive.
And when you kill the sex drive, you kill orgasm.
And when you kill orgasm, you kill that flood of drugs associated with attachment.
The things are connected in the brain.
And when you tamper with one brain system, you're going to tamper with another.
I'm just simply saying that a world without love is a deadly place.
So now --  Thank you.
I want to end with a story. And then, just a comment.
I've been studying romantic love and sex and attachment for 30 years.
I'm an identical twin; I am interested in why we're all alike.
Why you and I are alike, why the Iraqis and the Japanese and the Australian Aborigines and the people of the Amazon River are all alike.
And about a year ago, an Internet dating service, Match.com, came to me and asked me if I would design a new dating site for them.
I said, "I don't know anything about personality. You know?
I don't know. Do you think you've got the right person?"
They said, "Yes."
It got me thinking about why it is that you fall in love with one person rather than another.
That's my current project; it will be my next book.
There's all kinds of reasons that you fall in love with one person rather than another.
Timing is important. Proximity is important.
Mystery is important. You fall in love with somebody who's somewhat mysterious, in part because mystery elevates dopamine in the brain, probably pushes you over that threshold to fall in love.
You fall in love with somebody who fits within what I call your "love map," an unconscious list of traits that you build in childhood as you grow up.
And I also think that you gravitate to certain people, actually, with somewhat complementary brain systems.
And that's what I'm now contributing to this.
But I want to tell you a story, to illustrate.
I've been carrying on here about the biology of love.
I wanted to show you a little bit about the culture of it, too, the magic of it.
It's a story that was told to me by somebody who had heard it just from one -- probably a true story.
It was a graduate student -- I'm at Rutgers and my two colleagues -- Art Aron is at SUNY Stony Brook.
That's where we put our people in the MRI machine.
And this graduate student was madly in love with another graduate student, and she was not in love with him.
And they were all at a conference in Beijing.
And he knew from our work that if you go and do something very novel with somebody, you can drive up the dopamine in the brain, and perhaps trigger this brain system for romantic love.
So he decided he'd put science to work.
And he invited this girl to go off on a rickshaw ride with him.
And sure enough -- I've never been in one, but apparently they go all around the buses and the trucks and it's crazy and it's noisy and it's exciting.
He figured that this would drive up the dopamine, and she'd fall in love with him.
So off they go and she's squealing and squeezing him and laughing and having a wonderful time.
An hour later they get down off of the rickshaw, and she throws her hands up and she says, "Wasn't that wonderful?"
And, "Wasn't that rickshaw driver handsome!"
There's magic to love!
But I will end by saying that millions of years ago, we evolved three basic drives: the sex drive, romantic love and attachment to a long-term partner.
These circuits are deeply embedded in the human brain.
They're going to survive as long as our species survives on what Shakespeare called "this mortal coil."
Thank you.
It is a thrill to be here at a conference that's devoted to "Inspired by Nature" -- you can imagine.
And I'm also thrilled to be in the foreplay section.
Did you notice this section is foreplay?
Because I get to talk about one of my favorite critters, which is the Western Grebe. You haven't lived until you've seen these guys do their courtship dance.
I was on Bowman Lake in Glacier National Park, which is a long, skinny lake with sort of mountains upside down in it, and my partner and I have a rowing shell.
And so we were rowing, and one of these Western Grebes came along.
And what they do for their courtship dance is, they go together, the two of them, the two mates, and they begin to run underwater.
They paddle faster, and faster, and faster, until they're going so fast that they literally lift up out of the water, and they're standing upright, sort of paddling the top of the water.
And one of these Grebes came along while we were rowing.
And so we're in a skull, and we're moving really, really quickly.
And this Grebe, I think, sort of, mistaked us for a prospect, and started to run along the water next to us, in a courtship dance -- for miles.
It would stop, and then start, and then stop, and then start.
Now that is foreplay.
I came this close to changing species at that moment.
Obviously, life can teach us something in the entertainment section. Life has a lot to teach us.
But what I'd like to talk about today is what life might teach us in technology and in design.
What's happened since the book came out -- the book was mainly about research in biomimicry -- and what's happened since then is architects, designers, engineers -- people who make our world -- have started to call and say, we want a biologist to sit at the design table to help us, in real time, become inspired.
Or -- and this is the fun part for me -- we want you to take us out into the natural world. We'll come with a design challenge and we find the champion adapters in the natural world, who might inspire us.
So this is a picture from a Galapagos trip that we took with some wastewater treatment engineers; they purify wastewater.
And some of them were very resistant, actually, to being there.
What they said to us at first was, you know, we already do biomimicry.
We use bacteria to clean our water. And we said, well, that's not exactly being inspired by nature.
That's bioprocessing, you know; that's bio-assisted technology: using an organism to do your wastewater treatment is an old, old technology called "domestication."
This is learning something, learning an idea, from an organism and then applying it.
And so they still weren't getting it.
So we went for a walk on the beach and I said, well, give me one of your big problems. Give me a design challenge, sustainability speed bump, that's keeping you from being sustainable.
And they said scaling, which is the build-up of minerals inside of pipes.
And they said, you know what happens is, mineral -- just like at your house -- mineral builds up.
And then the aperture closes, and we have to flush the pipes with toxins, or we have to dig them up.
So if we had some way to stop this scaling -- and so I picked up some shells on the beach. And I asked them, what is scaling? What's inside your pipes?
And they said, calcium carbonate.
And I said, that's what this is; this is calcium carbonate.
And they didn't know that.
They didn't know that what a seashell is, it's templated by proteins, and then ions from the seawater crystallize in place to create a shell.
So the same sort of a process, without the proteins, is happening on the inside of their pipes. They didn't know.
This is not for lack of information; it's a lack of integration.
You know, it's a silo, people in silos. They didn't know that the same thing was happening. So one of them thought about it and said, OK, well, if this is just crystallization that happens automatically out of seawater -- self-assembly -- then why aren't shells infinite in size? What stops the scaling?
Why don't they just keep on going?
And I said, well, in the same way that they exude a protein and it starts the crystallization -- and then they all sort of leaned in -- they let go of a protein that stops the crystallization.
It literally adheres to the growing face of the crystal.
And, in fact, there is a product called TPA that's mimicked that protein -- that stop-protein -- and it's an environmentally friendly way to stop scaling in pipes.
That changed everything. From then on, you could not get these engineers back in the boat.
The first day they would take a hike, and it was, click, click, click, click. Five minutes later they were back in the boat.
We're done. You know, I've seen that island.
After this, they were crawling all over. They would snorkel for as long as we would let them snorkel.
What had happened was that they realized that there were organisms out there that had already solved the problems that they had spent their careers trying to solve.
Learning about the natural world is one thing; learning from the natural world -- that's the switch.
That's the profound switch.
What they realized was that the answers to their questions are everywhere; they just needed to change the lenses with which they saw the world.
3.8 billion years of field-testing.
10 to 30 -- Craig Venter will probably tell you; I think there's a lot more than 30 million -- well-adapted solutions.
The important thing for me is that these are solutions solved in context.
And the context is the Earth -- the same context that we're trying to solve our problems in.
So it's the conscious emulation of life's genius.
It's not slavishly mimicking -- although Al is trying to get the hairdo going -- it's not a slavish mimicry; it's taking the design principles, the genius of the natural world, and learning something from it.
Now, in a group with so many IT people, I do have to mention what I'm not going to talk about, and that is that your field is one that has learned an enormous amount from living things, on the software side. So there's computers that protect themselves, like an immune system, and we're learning from gene regulation and biological development. And we're learning from neural nets, genetic algorithms, evolutionary computing.
That's on the software side. But what's interesting to me is that we haven't looked at this, as much. I mean, these machines are really not very high tech in my estimation in the sense that there's dozens and dozens of carcinogens in the water in Silicon Valley.
So the hardware is not at all up to snuff in terms of what life would call a success.
So what can we learn about making -- not just computers, but everything?
The plane you came in, cars, the seats that you're sitting on.
How do we redesign the world that we make, the human-made world?
More importantly, what should we ask in the next 10 years?
And there's a lot of cool technologies out there that life has.
What's the syllabus?
Three questions, for me, are key.
How does life make things?
This is the opposite; this is how we make things.
It's called heat, beat and treat -- that's what material scientists call it.
And it's carving things down from the top, with 96 percent waste left over and only 4 percent product. You heat it up; you beat it with high pressures; you use chemicals. OK. Heat, beat and treat.
Life can't afford to do that. How does life make things?
How does life make the most of things?
That's a geranium pollen.
And its shape is what gives it the function of being able to tumble through air so easily. Look at that shape.
Life adds information to matter.
In other words: structure.
It gives it information. By adding information to matter, it gives it a function that's different than without that structure.
And thirdly, how does life make things disappear into systems?
Because life doesn't really deal in things; there are no things in the natural world divorced from their systems.
Really quick syllabus.
As I'm reading more and more now, and following the story, there are some amazing things coming up in the biological sciences.
And at the same time, I'm listening to a lot of businesses and finding what their sort of grand challenges are.
The two groups are not talking to each other.
At all.
What in the world of biology might be helpful at this juncture, to get us through this sort of evolutionary knothole that we're in?
I'm going to try to go through 12, really quickly.
One that's exciting to me is self-assembly.
Now, you've heard about this in terms of nanotechnology.
Back to that shell: the shell is a self-assembling material.
On the lower left there is a picture of mother of pearl forming out of seawater. It's a layered structure that's mineral and then polymer, and it makes it very, very tough.
It's twice as tough as our high-tech ceramics.
But what's really interesting: unlike our ceramics that are in kilns, it happens in seawater. It happens near, in and near, the organism's body.
This is Sandia National Labs.
A guy named Jeff Brinker has found a way to have a self-assembling coding process.
Imagine being able to make ceramics at room temperature by simply dipping something into a liquid, lifting it out of the liquid, and having evaporation force the molecules in the liquid together, so that they jigsaw together in the same way as this crystallization works.
Imagine making all of our hard materials that way.
Imagine spraying the precursors to a PV cell, to a solar cell, onto a roof, and having it self-assemble into a layered structure that harvests light.
Here's an interesting one for the IT world: bio-silicon. This is a diatom, which is made of silicates.
And so silicon, which we make right now -- it's part of our carcinogenic problem in the manufacture of our chips -- this is a bio-mineralization process that's now being mimicked.
This is at UC Santa Barbara. Look at these diatoms.
This is from Ernst Haeckel's work.
Imagine being able to -- and, again, it's a templated process, and it solidifies out of a liquid process -- imagine being able to have that sort of structure coming out at room temperature.
Imagine being able to make perfect lenses.
On the left, this is a brittle star; it's covered with lenses that the people at Lucent Technologies have found have no distortion whatsoever.
It's one of the most distortion-free lenses we know of.
And there's many of them, all over its entire body.
What's interesting, again, is that it self-assembles.
A woman named Joanna Aizenberg, at Lucent, is now learning to do this in a low-temperature process to create these sort of lenses. She's also looking at fiber optics.
That's a sea sponge that has a fiber optic.
Down at the very base of it, there's fiber optics that work better than ours, actually, to move light, but you can tie them in a knot; they're incredibly flexible.
Here's another big idea: CO2 as a feedstock.
A guy named Geoff Coates, at Cornell, said to himself, you know, plants do not see CO2 as the biggest poison of our time.
We see it that way. Plants are busy making long chains of starches and glucose, right, out of CO2. He's found a way -- he's found a catalyst -- and he's found a way to take CO2 and make it into polycarbonates. Biodegradable plastics out of CO2 -- how plant-like.
Solar transformations: the most exciting one.
There are people who are mimicking the energy-harvesting device inside of purple bacterium, the people at ASU. Even more interesting, lately, in the last couple of weeks, people have seen that there's an enzyme called hydrogenase that's able to evolve hydrogen from proton and electrons, and is able to take hydrogen up -- basically what's happening in a fuel cell, in the anode of a fuel cell and in a reversible fuel cell.
In our fuel cells, we do it with platinum; life does it with a very, very common iron.
And a team has now just been able to mimic that hydrogen-juggling hydrogenase.
That's very exciting for fuel cells -- to be able to do that without platinum.
Power of shape: here's a whale. We've seen that the fins of this whale have tubercles on them. And those little bumps actually increase efficiency in, for instance, the edge of an airplane -- increase efficiency by about 32 percent.
Which is an amazing fossil fuel savings, if we were to just put that on the edge of a wing.
Color without pigments: this peacock is creating color with shape.
Light comes through, it bounces back off the layers; it's called thin-film interference. Imagine being able to self-assemble products with the last few layers playing with light to create color.
Imagine being able to create a shape on the outside of a surface, so that it's self-cleaning with just water. That's what a leaf does.
See that up-close picture?
That's a ball of water, and those are dirt particles.
And that's an up-close picture of a lotus leaf.
There's a company making a product called Lotusan, which mimics -- when the building facade paint dries, it mimics the bumps in a self-cleaning leaf, and rainwater cleans the building.
Water is going to be our big, grand challenge: quenching thirst.
Here are two organisms that pull water.
The one on the left is the Namibian beetle pulling water out of fog.
The one on the right is a pill bug -- pulls water out of air, does not drink fresh water.
Pulling water out of Monterey fog and out of the sweaty air in Atlanta, before it gets into a building, are key technologies.
Separation technologies are going to be extremely important.
What if we were to say, no more hard rock mining?
What if we were to separate out metals from waste streams, small amounts of metals in water? That's what microbes do; they chelate metals out of water.
There's a company here in San Francisco called MR3 that is embedding mimics of the microbes' molecules on filters to mine waste streams.
Green chemistry is chemistry in water.
We do chemistry in organic solvents.
This is a picture of the spinnerets coming out of a spider and the silk being formed from a spider. Isn't that beautiful?
Green chemistry is replacing our industrial chemistry with nature's recipe book.
It's not easy, because life uses only a subset of the elements in the periodic table.
And we use all of them, even the toxic ones.
To figure out the elegant recipes that would take the small subset of the periodic table, and create miracle materials like that cell, is the task of green chemistry.
Timed degradation: packaging that is good until you don't want it to be good anymore, and dissolves on cue.
That's a mussel you can find in the waters out here, and the threads holding it to a rock are timed; at exactly two years, they begin to dissolve.
Healing: this is a good one.
That little guy over there is a tardigrade.
There is a problem with vaccines around the world not getting to patients. And the reason is that the refrigeration somehow gets broken; what's called the "cold chain" gets broken.
A guy named Bruce Rosner looked at the tardigrade -- which dries out completely, and yet stays alive for months and months and months, and is able to regenerate itself.
And he found a way to dry out vaccines -- encase them in the same sort of sugar capsules as the tardigrade has within its cells -- meaning that vaccines no longer need to be refrigerated.
They can be put in a glove compartment, OK.
Learning from organisms. This is a session about water -- learning about organisms that can do without water, in order to create a vaccine that lasts and lasts and lasts without refrigeration.
I'm not going to get to 12.
But what I am going to do is tell you that the most important thing, besides all of these adaptations, is the fact that these organisms have figured out a way to do the amazing things they do while taking care of the place that's going to take care of their offspring.
When they're involved in foreplay, they're thinking about something very, very important -- and that's having their genetic material remain, 10,000 generations from now.
And that means finding a way to do what they do without destroying the place that'll take care of their offspring.
That's the biggest design challenge.
Luckily, there are millions and millions of geniuses willing to gift us with their best ideas.
Good luck having a conversation with them.
Thank you.
Chris Anderson: Talk about foreplay, I -- we need to get to 12, but really quickly.
Janine Benyus: Oh really?
CA: Yeah. Just like, you know, like the 10-second version of 10, 11 and 12. Because we just -- your slides are so gorgeous, and the ideas are so big, I can't stand to let you go down without seeing 10, 11 and 12.
JB: OK, put this -- OK, I'll just hold this thing. OK, great.
OK, so that's the healing one.
Sensing and responding: feedback is a huge thing.
This is a locust. There can be 80 million of them in a square kilometer, and yet they don't collide with one another.
And yet we have 3.6 million car collisions a year.
Right. There's a person at Newcastle who has figured out that it's a very large neuron.
And she's actually figuring out how to make based on this very large neuron in the locust.
This is a huge and important one, number 11.
And that's the growing fertility.
That means, you know, net fertility farming.
We should be growing fertility. And, oh yes -- we get food, too.
Because we have to grow the capacity of this planet to create more and more opportunities for life.
And really, that's what other organisms do as well.
In ensemble, that's what whole ecosystems do: they create more and more opportunities for life.
Our farming has done the opposite.
So, farming based on how a prairie builds soil, ranching based on how a native ungulate herd actually increases the health of the range, even wastewater treatment based on how a marsh not only cleans the water, but creates incredibly sparkling productivity.
This is the simple design brief. I mean, it looks simple because the system, over 3.8 billion years, has worked this out.
That is, those organisms that have not been able to figure out how to enhance or sweeten their places, are not around to tell us about it.
That's the twelfth one.
Life -- and this is the secret trick; this is the magic trick -- life creates conditions conducive to life.
It builds soil; it cleans air; it cleans water; it mixes the cocktail of gases that you and I need to live.
And it does that in the middle of having great foreplay and meeting their needs. So it's not mutually exclusive.
We have to find a way to meet our needs, while making of this place an Eden.
CA: Janine, thank you so much.
I don't know about you, but I haven't quite figured out exactly what technology means in my life.
I've spent the past year thinking about what it really should be about.
Should I be pro-technology? Should I embrace it full arms?
Should I be wary? Like you, I'm very tempted by the latest thing.
But at the other hand, a couple of years ago I gave up all of my possessions, sold all my technology -- except for a bicycle -- and rode across 3,000 miles on the U.S. back roads under the power of my one body, fuelled mostly by Twinkies and junk food.
And I've since then tried to keep technology at arm's length in many ways, so it doesn't master my life.
At the same time, I run a website on cool tools, where I issue a daily obsession of the latest things in technology.
So I'm still perplexed about what the true meaning of technology is as it relates to humanity, as it relates to nature, as it relates to the spiritual.
And I'm not even sure we know what technology is.
And one definition of technology is that which is first recorded.
This is the first example of the modern use of technology that I can find.
It was the suggested syllabus for dealing with the Applied Arts and Science at Cambridge University in 1829.
Before that, obviously, technology didn't exist. But obviously it did.
I like one of the definitions that Alan Kay has for technology.
He says technology is anything that was invented after you were born.
So it sums up a lot of what we're talking about.
Danny Hillis actually has an update on that -- he says technology is anything that doesn't quite work yet.
Which also, I think, gets into a little bit of our current idea.
But I was interested in another definition of technology.
Something, again, that went back to something more fundamental.
Something that was deeper. And as I struggled to understand that, I came up with a way of framing the question that seemed to work for me in my investigations.
And I'm, this morning, going to talk about this for the first time.
So this is a very rough attempt to think out loud.
The question that I came up with was this question: what does technology want? And by that, I don't mean, does it want chocolate or vanilla? By what it wants, I mean, what are its inherent trends and biases?
What are its tendencies over time? One way to think about this is thinking about biological organisms, which we've heard a lot about.
And the trick that Richard Dawkins does, which is to say, to look at them as simply as genes, as vehicles for genes.
So he's saying, what do genes want? The selfish gene.
And I'm applying a similar trick to say, what if we looked at the universe in our culture through the eyes of technology? What does technology want?
Obviously, this in an incomplete question, just as looking at an organism as only a gene is an incomplete way of looking at it.
But it's still very, very productive. So I'm attempting to say, if we take technology's view of the world, what does it want?
And I think once we ask that question we have to go back, actually, to life. Because obviously, if we keep extending the origins of technology far back, I think we come back to life at some point.
So that's where I want to begin my little exploration, is in life.
And like you heard from the previous speakers, we don't really know what life there is on Earth right now.
We have really no idea.
Craig Venter's tremendous and brilliant attempt to DNA sequence things in the ocean is great.
Brian Farrell's work is all part of this agenda to try and actually discover all the species on Earth.
And one of the things that we should do is just make a grid of the globe and randomly go and inspect all the places that the grid intersects, just to see what's on life. And if we did that with our little Martian probe, which we have not done on Earth, we would begin to see some incredible species.
This is not on another planet. These are things that are hidden away on our planet.
This is an ant that stores its colleagues' honey in its abdomen.
Each one of these organisms that we've described -- that you've seen from Jamie and others, these magnificent things -- what they're doing, each one of them, is they're hacking the rules of life.
I can't think of a single general principle of biology that does not have an exception somewhere by some organism.
Every single thing that we can think of -- and if you heard Olivia's talk about the sexual habits, you'll realize that there isn't anything we can say that's true for all life, because every single one of them is hacking something about it.
This is a solar-powered sea slug. It's a nudibranch that has incorporated chloroplast inside it to drive its energy.
This is another version of that. This is a sea dragon, and the one on the bottom, the blue one, is a juvenile that has not yet swallowed the acid, has not yet taken in the brown-green algae pond scum into its body to give it energy.
These are hacks, and if we looked at the general shape of the approaches to hacking life there are, current consensus, six kingdoms. Six different broad approaches: the plants, the animals, the fungi, the protests -- the little things -- the bacteria and the Archaea bacteria. The Archaeas.
Those are the general approaches to life. That's one way to look at life on Earth today.
But a more interesting way, the current way to take the long view, is to look at it in an evolutionary perspective.
And here we have a view of evolution where rather than having evolution go over the linear time, we have it coming out from the center.
So in the center is the most primitive, and this is a genealogical chart of all life on earth. This is all the same six kingdoms.
You see 4,000 representative species, and you can see where we are.
But what I like about this is it shows that every living organism on Earth today is equally evolved.
Those fungi and bacteria are as highly evolved as humans.
They've been around just as long and gone through just the same kind of trial and error to get here.
But we see that each one of these is actually hacking, and has a different way of finding out how to do life.
And if we take the long-term trends of life, if we begin to say, what does evolution want? There's several things that we see.
One of the things about evolution is that nowhere on Earth have we ever been where we don't find life.
We find life at the bottom of every long-term, long-distance drilling core into the center of rock that we bring up -- and there's bacteria in the pores of that rock.
And wherever life is, it never retreats. It's ubiquitous and it wants to be more.
More and more of the inert matter of the globe is being touched and animated by life.
The second thing is is we see diversity. We also see specialization.
We see the movement from a general-purpose cell to the more specific and specialized.
And we see a drift towards complexity that's very intuitive.
And actually, we have current data that does show that there is an actual drift towards complexity over time.
And the last thing, I bring back this nudibranch.
One of the things we see about life is that it moves from the inner to increasing sociability. And by that it means that there is more and more of life whose entire environment is other life.
Like those chloroplast cells -- they're completely surrounded by other life.
They never touch the inner matter. There is more and more co-evolution.
And so the general, long-term trends of evolution are roughly these five: ubiquity, diversity, specialization, complexity and socialization. Now, I took that and said, OK, what are the long-term trends in technology?
And again, my question is, what does technology want?
And so, remarkably, I discovered that there's also a drift toward specialization.
That we see there's a general hammer, and hammers become more and more specific over time.
There's obviously diversity. Huge numbers of things.
This is all the contents of a Japanese home.
I actually had my daughter -- gave her a tally counter, and I gave her an assignment last summer to go around and count the number of species of technology in our household.
And it came up with 6,000 different species of products.
I did some research and found out that the King of England, Henry VIII, had only about 7,000 items in his household.
And he was the King of England, and that was the entire wealth of England at the time.
So we're seeing huge numbers of diversity in the kinds of things.
This is a scene from Star Wars where the 3PO comes out and he sees machines making machines. How depraved!
Well, this is actually what we're headed towards: world machines.
And the technology is only being thrown out by other technologies.
Most machines will only ever be in contact with other technology and not non-technology, or even life.
And thirdly, the idea that machines are becoming biological and complex is at this point a cliche. And I'm happy to say, I was partly responsible for that cliche that machines are becoming biological, but that's pretty evident.
So the major trends in technology evolution actually are the same as in biological evolution. The same drives that we see towards ubiquity, towards diversity, towards socialization, towards complexity. That is maybe not a big surprise because if we map out, say, the evolution of armor, you can actually follow a sort of an evolutionary-type cladistic tree.
I suggest that, in fact, technology is the seventh kingdom of life.
That its operations and how it works is so similar that we can think of it as the seventh kingdom.
And so it would be sort of approximately up there, coming out of the animal kingdom. And if we were to do that, we would find out -- we could actually approach technology in this way.
This is Niles Eldredge. He was the co-developer with Stephen Jay Gould of the theory of punctuated equilibrium.
But as a sideline, he happens to collect cornets.
He has one of the world's largest collections -- about 500 of them.
And he has decided to treat them as if they were trilobites, or snails, and to do a morphological analysis, and try to derive their genealogical history over time.
This is his chart, which is not quite published yet.
But the most interesting aspect about this is that if you look at those red lines at the bottom, those indicate basically a parentage of a type of cornet that was no longer made. That does not happen in biology.
When something is extinct, you can't have it as your parent.
But that does happen in technology. And it turns out that that's so distinctive that you can actually look at this tree, and you can actually use it to determine that this is a technological system versus a biological system.
In fact, this idea of resurrecting the whole idea is so important that I began to think about what happens with old technology.
And it turns out that, in fact, technologies don't die.
So I suggested this to an historian of science, and he said, "Well, what about, you know, come on, what about steam cars?
They're not around anymore." Well actually, they are.
In fact, they're so around that you can buy new parts for a Stanley steam automobile.
And this is a website of a guy who's selling brand new parts for the Stanley automobile. And the thing that I liked is sort of this one-click, add-to-your-cart button --  -- for buying steam valves. I mean, it was just -- it was really there.
And so, I began to think about, well, maybe that's just a random sample.
Maybe I should do this sort of in a more conservative way.
So I took the great big 1895 Montgomery Ward's catalog and I randomly went through it. And I took a page -- not quite a random page -- I took a page that was actually more difficult than others because lots of the pages are filled with things that are still being made. But I took this page and I said, how many of these things are still being made?
And not antiques. I want to know how many of these things are still in production.
And the answer is: all of them.
All of them are still being produced. So you've got corn shellers.
I don't know who needs a corn sheller.
Be it corn shellers -- you've got ploughs; you've got fan mills; all these things -- and these are not, again, antiques. These are -- you can order these. You can go to the web and you can buy them now, brand-new made. So in a certain sense, technologies don't die.
In fact, you can buy, for 50 bucks, a stone-age knife made exactly the same way that they were made 10,000 years ago.
It's short, bone handle, 50 bucks. And in fact, what's important is that this information actually never died out.
It's not just that it was resurrected. It's continued all along.
And in Papua New Guinea, they were making stone axes until two decades ago, just as a course of practical matters.
Even when we try to get rid of a technology, it's actually very hard.
So we've all heard about the Amish giving up cars.
We've heard about the Japanese giving up guns.
We've heard about this and that. But I actually went back and took what I could find, the examples in history where there have been prohibitions against technology, and then I tried to find out when they came back in, because they always came back in. And it turns out that the time, the duration of when they were outlawed and prohibited, is decreasing over time. And that basically, you can delay technology,
but you can't kill it. So this makes sense, because in a certain sense what culture is, is the accumulation of ideas.
That's what it's for. It's so that ideas don't die out.
And when we take that, we take this idea of what culture is doing and add it to what the long-term trajectory -- again, in life's evolution -- we find that each case -- each of the major transitions in life -- what they're really about is accelerating and changing the way in which evolution happens.
They're actually changing the way in which ideas are generated.
So all these steps in evolution are increasing, basically, the evolution of evolvability.
So what's happening over time in life is that the ways in which you generate these new ideas, these new hacks, are increasing. And the real tricks are ways in which you kind of explore the way of exploring.
And then what we see in the singularity, that prophesized by Kurzweil and others -- his idea that technology is accelerating evolution.
It's accelerating the way in which we search for ideas.
So if you have life hacking -- life means hacking, the game of survival -- then evolution is a way to extend the game by changing the rules of the game.
And what technology is really about is better ways to evolve.
That is what we call an "infinite game."
That's the definition of "infinite game." A finite game is play to win, and an infinite game is played to keep playing.
And I believe that technology is actually a cosmic force.
The origins of technology was not in 1829, but was actually at the beginning of the Big Bang, and at that moment the entire huge billions of stars in the universe were compressed. The entire universe was compressed into a little quantum dot, and it was so tight in there, there was no room for any difference at all.
That's the definition. There was no temperature.
There was no difference whatsoever. And at the Big Bang, what it expanded was the potential for difference.
So as it expands and as things expand what we have is the potential for differences, diversity, options, choices, opportunities, possibilities and freedoms.
Those are all basically the same thing.
And those are the things that technology brings us.
That's what technology is bringing us: choices, possibilities, freedoms.
That's what it's about. It's this expansion of room to make differences.
And so a hammer, when we grab a hammer, that's what we're grabbing.
And that's why we continue to grab technology -- because we want those things. Those things are good.
Differences, freedom, choices, possibilities.
And each time we make a new opportunity place, we're allowing a platform to make new ones.
And I think it's really important. Because if you can imagine Mozart before the technology of the piano was invented -- what a loss to society there would be.
Imagine Van Gogh being born before the technologies of cheap oil paints.
Imagine Hitchcock before the technologies of film.
Somewhere, today, there are millions of young children being born whose technology of self-expression has not yet been invented.
We have a moral obligation to invent technology so that every person on the globe has the potential to realize their true difference.
We want a trillion zillion species of one individuals.
That's what technology really wants.
I'm going to skip through some of the objections because I don't have answers to why there's deforestation.
I don't have an answer to the fact that there seem to be bad technologies. I don't have an answer to how this impacts on our dignity, other than to suggest that maybe the seventh kingdom, because it's so close to what life is about, maybe we can bring it back and have it help us monitor life.
Maybe in some ways the fact that what we're trying to do with technology is find a good home for it.
It's a terrible thing to spray DDT on cotton fields, but it's a really good thing to use to eliminate millions of cases of death due to malaria in a small village.
Our humanity is actually defined by technology.
All the things that we think that we really like about humanity is being driven by technology. This is the infinite game.
That's what we're talking about.
You see, technology is a way to evolve the evolution.
It's a way to explore possibilities and opportunities and create more.
And it's actually a way of playing the game, of playing all the games.
That's what technology wants.
And so when I think about what technology wants, I think that it has to do with the fact that every person here -- and I really believe this -- every person here has an assignment. And your assignment is to spend your life discovering what your assignment is.
That recursive nature is the infinite game.
And if you play that well, you'll have other people involved, so even that game extends and continues even when you're gone.
That is the infinite game. And what technology is is the medium in which we play that infinite game.
And so I think that we should embrace technology because it is an essential part of our journey in finding out who we are.
Thank you.
I think I was supposed to talk about my new book, which is called "Blink," and it's about snap judgments and first impressions.
And it comes out in January, and I hope you all buy it in triplicate.
But I was thinking about this, and I realized that although my new book makes me happy, and I think would make my mother happy, it's not really about happiness.
So I decided instead, I would talk about someone who I think has done as much to make Americans happy as perhaps anyone over the last 20 years, a man who is a great personal hero of mine: someone by the name of Howard Moskowitz, who is most famous for reinventing spaghetti sauce.
Howard's about this high, and he's round, and he's in his 60s, and he has big huge glasses and thinning gray hair, and he has a kind of wonderful exuberance and vitality, and he has a parrot, and he loves the opera, and he's a great aficionado of medieval history.
And by profession, he's a psychophysicist.
Now, I should tell you that I have no idea what psychophysics is, although at some point in my life, I dated a girl for two years who was getting her doctorate in psychophysics.
Which should tell you something about that relationship.  As far as I know, psychophysics is about measuring things.
And Howard is very interested in measuring things.
And he graduated with his doctorate from Harvard, and he set up a little consulting shop in White Plains, New York.
And one of his first clients was Pepsi. This is many years ago, back in the early 70s.
And Pepsi came to Howard and they said, "You know, there's this new thing called aspartame, and we would like to make Diet Pepsi.
We'd like you to figure out how much aspartame we should put in each can of Diet Pepsi in order to have the perfect drink."
Now that sounds like an incredibly straightforward question to answer, and that's what Howard thought. Because Pepsi told him, "We're working with a band between eight and 12 percent.
Anything below eight percent sweetness is not sweet enough; anything above 12 percent sweetness is too sweet.
We want to know: what's the sweet spot between 8 and 12?"
Now, if I gave you this problem to do, you would all say, it's very simple.
What we do is you make up a big experimental batch of Pepsi, at every degree of sweetness -- eight percent, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, all the way up to 12 -- and we try this out with thousands of people, and we plot the results on a curve, and we take the most popular concentration, right? Really simple.
Howard does the experiment, and he gets the data back, and he plots it on a curve, and all of a sudden he realizes it's not a nice bell curve.
In fact, the data doesn't make any sense.
It's a mess. It's all over the place.
Now, most people in that business, in the world of testing food and such, are not dismayed when the data comes back a mess.
They think, "Well, you know, figuring out what people think about cola's not that easy."
"You know, maybe we made an error somewhere along the way."
"You know, let's just make an educated guess," and they simply point and they go for 10 percent, right in the middle.
Howard is not so easily placated.
Howard is a man of a certain degree of intellectual standards.
And this was not good enough for him, and this question bedeviled him for years.
And he would think it through and say, "What was wrong?
Why could we not make sense of this experiment with Diet Pepsi?"
And one day, he was sitting in a diner in White Plains, about to go trying to dream up some work for Nescaf.
And suddenly, like a bolt of lightning, the answer came to him.
And that is, that when they analyzed the Diet Pepsi data, they were asking the wrong question.
They were looking for the perfect Pepsi, and they should have been looking for the perfect Pepsis. Trust me.
This was an enormous revelation.
This was one of the most brilliant breakthroughs in all of food science.
Howard immediately went on the road, and he would go to conferences around the country, and he would stand up and say, "You had been looking for the perfect Pepsi. You're wrong.
You should be looking for the perfect Pepsis."
And people would look at him blankly and say, "What are you talking about? Craziness."
And they would say, "Move! Next!"
Tried to get business, nobody would hire him -- he was obsessed, though, and he talked about it and talked about it.
Howard loves the Yiddish expression "To a worm in horseradish, the world is horseradish."
This was his horseradish.  He was obsessed with it!
And finally, he had a breakthrough.
Vlasic Pickles came to him, and they said, "Doctor Moskowitz, we want to make the perfect pickle." And he said, "There is no perfect pickle; there are only perfect pickles." And he came back to them and he said, "You don't just need to improve your regular; you need to create zesty."
And that's where we got zesty pickles.
Then the next person came to him: Campbell's Soup.
And this was even more important.
In fact, Campbell's Soup is where Howard made his reputation.
Campbell's made Prego, and Prego, in the early 80s, was struggling next to Rag, which was the dominant spaghetti sauce of the 70s and 80s.
In the industry -- I don't know whether you care about this, or how much time I have to go into this.
But it was, technically speaking -- this is an aside -- Prego is a better tomato sauce than Rag.
The quality of the tomato paste is much better; the spice mix is far superior; it adheres to the pasta in a much more pleasing way.
In fact, they would do the famous bowl test back in the 70s with Rag and Prego.
You'd have a plate of spaghetti, and you would pour it on, right?
And the Rag would all go to the bottom, and the Prego would sit on top.
That's called "adherence."
And, anyway, despite the fact that they were far superior in adherence, and the quality of their tomato paste, Prego was struggling.
So they came to Howard, and they said, fix us.
And Howard looked at their product line, and he said, what you have is a dead tomato society.
So he said, this is what I want to do.
And he got together with the Campbell's soup kitchen, and he made 45 varieties of spaghetti sauce.
And he varied them according to every conceivable way that you can vary tomato sauce: by sweetness, by level of garlic, by tomatoey-ness, by tartness, by sourness, by visible solids -- my favorite term in the spaghetti sauce business.  Every conceivable way you can vary spaghetti sauce, he varied spaghetti sauce.
And then he took this whole raft of 45 spaghetti sauces, and he went on the road.
He went to New York, to Chicago, he went to Jacksonville, to Los Angeles. And he brought in people by the truckload into big halls.
And he sat them down for two hours, and over the course of that two hours, he gave them ten bowls.
Ten small bowls of pasta, with a different spaghetti sauce on each one.
And after they ate each bowl, they had to rate, from 0 to 100, how good they thought the spaghetti sauce was.
At the end of that process, after doing it for months and months, he had a mountain of data about how the American people feel about spaghetti sauce.
And then he analyzed the data.
Did he look for the most popular variety of spaghetti sauce?
No! Howard doesn't believe that there is such a thing.
Instead, he looked at the data, and he said, let's see if we can group all these different data points into clusters.
Let's see if they congregate around certain ideas.
And sure enough, if you sit down, and you analyze all this data on spaghetti sauce, you realize that all Americans fall into one of three groups.
There are people who like their spaghetti sauce plain; there are people who like their spaghetti sauce spicy; and there are people who like it extra chunky.
And of those three facts, the third one was the most significant, because at the time, in the early 1980s, if you went to a supermarket, you would not find extra-chunky spaghetti sauce.
And Prego turned to Howard, and they said, "You're telling me that one third of Americans crave extra-chunky spaghetti sauce and yet no one is servicing their needs?" And he said "Yes!"
And Prego then went back, and completely reformulated their spaghetti sauce, and came out with a line of extra chunky that immediately and completely took over the spaghetti sauce business in this country.
And over the next 10 years, they made 600 million dollars off their line of extra-chunky sauces.
Everyone else in the industry looked at what Howard had done, and they said, "Oh my god! We've been thinking all wrong!"
And that's when you started to get seven different kinds of vinegar, and 14 different kinds of mustard, and 71 different kinds of olive oil.
And then eventually even Rag hired Howard, and Howard did the exact same thing for Rag that he did for Prego.
And today, if you go to a really good supermarket, do you know how many Rags there are?
36!
In six varieties: Cheese, Light, Extra-Chunky Garden.  That's Howard's doing. That is Howard's gift to the American people.
Now why is that important?
It is, in fact, enormously important. I'll explain to you why.
What Howard did is he fundamentally changed the way the food industry thinks about making you happy.
Assumption number one in the food industry used to be that the way to find out what people want to eat, what will make people happy, is to ask them.
And for years and years and years, Rag and Prego would have focus groups, and they would sit you down, and they would say, "What do you want in a spaghetti sauce? Tell us what you want in a spaghetti sauce."
And for all those years -- 20, 30 years -- through all those focus group sessions, no one ever said they wanted extra-chunky.
Even though at least a third of them, deep in their hearts, actually did.
People don't know what they want!
As Howard loves to say, "The mind knows not what the tongue wants."
It's a mystery!
And a critically important step in understanding our own desires and tastes is to realize that we cannot always explain what we want, deep down.
If I asked all of you, for example, in this room, what you want in a coffee, you know what you'd say? Every one of you would say, "I want a dark, rich, hearty roast."
It's what people always say when you ask them.
"What do you like?" "Dark, rich, hearty roast!"
What percentage of you actually like a dark, rich, hearty roast?
According to Howard, somewhere between 25 and 27 percent of you.
Most of you like milky, weak coffee.
But you will never, ever say to someone who asks you what you want that "I want a milky, weak coffee."
So that's number one thing that Howard did.
Number two thing that Howard did is he made us realize -- it's another very critical point -- he made us realize the importance of what he likes to call "horizontal segmentation."
Why is this critical?
Because this is the way the food industry thought before Howard.
What were they obsessed with in the early 80s? They were obsessed with mustard.
In particular, they were obsessed with the story of Grey Poupon.
Used to be, there were two mustards: French's and Gulden's.
What were they? Yellow mustard. What's in it?
Yellow mustard seeds, turmeric, and paprika. That was mustard.
Grey Poupon came along, with a Dijon. Right?
Much more volatile brown mustard seed, some white wine, a nose hit, much more delicate aromatics. And what do they do?
They put it in a little tiny glass jar, with a wonderful enameled label on it, made it look French, even though it's made in Oxnard, California.
And instead of charging a dollar fifty for the eight-ounce bottle, the way that French's and Gulden's did, they decided to charge four dollars.
And they had those ads.
With the guy in the Rolls Royce, eating the Grey Poupon.
Another pulls up, and says, "Do you have any Grey Poupon?"
And the whole thing, after they did that, Grey Poupon takes off!
Takes over the mustard business!
And everyone's take-home lesson from that was that the way to make people happy is to give them something that is more expensive, something to aspire to. It's to make them turn their back on what they think they like now, and reach out for something higher up the mustard hierarchy.
A better mustard! A more expensive mustard!
A mustard of more sophistication and culture and meaning.
And Howard looked to that and said, "That's wrong!"
Mustard does not exist on a hierarchy.
Mustard exists, just like tomato sauce, on a horizontal plane.
There is no good mustard or bad mustard.
There is no perfect mustard or imperfect mustard.
There are only different kinds of mustards that suit different kinds of people.
He fundamentally democratized the way we think about taste.
And for that, as well, we owe Howard Moskowitz a huge vote of thanks.
Third thing that Howard did, and perhaps the most important, is Howard confronted the notion of the Platonic dish.  What do I mean by that?
For the longest time in the food industry, there was a sense that there was one way, a perfect way, to make a dish.
You go to Chez Panisse, they give you the red-tail sashimi with roasted pumpkin seeds in a something something reduction.
They don't give you five options on the reduction.
They don't say, "Do you want the extra-chunky reduction, or ...?" No!
You just get the reduction. Why? Because the chef at Chez Panisse has a Platonic notion about red-tail sashimi.
"This is the way it ought to be."
And she serves it that way time and time again, and if you quarrel with her, she will say, "You know what? You're wrong! This is the best way it ought to be in this restaurant."
Now that same idea fueled the commercial food industry as well.
They had a Platonic notion of what tomato sauce was.
And where did that come from? It came from Italy.
Italian tomato sauce is what?
It's blended; it's thin.
When we talked about "authentic tomato sauce" in the 1970s, we talked about Italian tomato sauce, we talked about the earliest Rags, which had no visible solids, right?
Which were thin, you just put a little bit and it sunk down to the bottom of the pasta.
That's what it was. And why were we attached to that?
Because we thought that what it took to make people happy was to provide them with the most culturally authentic tomato sauce, A.
And B, we thought that if we gave them the culturally authentic tomato sauce, then they would embrace it.
And that's what would please the maximum number of people.
In other words, people in the cooking world were looking for cooking universals.
They were looking for one way to treat all of us.
And it's good reason for them to be obsessed with the idea of universals, because all of science, through the 19th century and much of the 20th, was obsessed with universals.
Psychologists, medical scientists, economists were all interested in finding out the rules that govern the way all of us behave.
But that changed, right?
What is the great revolution in science of the last 10, 15 years?
It is the movement from the search for universals to the understanding of variability.
Now in medical science, we don't want to know, necessarily, just how cancer works, we want to know how your cancer is different from my cancer.
I guess my cancer different from your cancer.
Genetics has opened the door to the study of human variability.
What Howard Moskowitz was doing was saying, "This same revolution needs to happen in the world of tomato sauce."
And for that, we owe him a great vote of thanks.
I'll give you one last illustration of variability, and that is -- oh, I'm sorry.
Howard not only believed that, but he took it a second step, which was to say that when we pursue universal principles in food, we aren't just making an error; we are actually doing ourselves a massive disservice.
And the example he used was coffee.
And coffee is something he did a lot of work with, with Nescaf.
If I were to ask all of you to try and come up with a brand of coffee -- a type of coffee, a brew -- that made all of you happy, and then I asked you to rate that coffee, the average score in this room for coffee would be about 60 on a scale of 0 to 100.
If, however, you allowed me to break you into coffee clusters, maybe three or four coffee clusters, and I could make coffee just for each of those individual clusters, your scores would go from 60 to 75 or 78.
The difference between coffee at 60 and coffee at 78 is a difference between coffee that makes you wince, and coffee that makes you deliriously happy.
That is the final, and I think most beautiful lesson, of Howard Moskowitz: that in embracing the diversity of human beings, we will find a surer way to true happiness.
Thank you.
Over the past couple of days, as I've been preparing for my speech, I've become more and more nervous about what I'm going to say and about being on the same stage as all these fascinating people.
Being on the same stage as Al Gore, who was the first person I ever voted for.
And --  So I was getting pretty nervous and, you know, I didn't know that Chris sits on the stage, and that's more nerve-racking.
But then I started thinking about my family.
I started thinking about my father and my grandfather and my great-grandfather, and I realized that I had all of these Teds going through my bloodstream --  that I had to consider this "my element."
So, who am I?
Chris kind of mentioned I started a company with my husband.
We have about 125 people internationally.
If you looked in the book, you saw this ...
which I really was appalled by.
And because I wanted to impress you all with slides, since I saw the great presentations yesterday with graphs, I made a graph that moves, and I talk about the makeup of me.
So, besides this freakish thing, this is my science slide.
This is math, and this is science, this is genetics.
This is my grandmother, and this is where I get this mouth.
So -- I'm a blogger, which, probably, to a lot of you, means different things.
You may have heard about the Kryptonite lock brouhaha, where a blogger talked about how you hack or break into a Kryptonite lock using a ballpoint pen, and it spread all over.
Kryptonite had to adjust the lock, and they had to address it to avoid too many customer concerns.
You may have heard about Rathergate, which was basically the result of bloggers realizing that the "th" in 111 is not typeset on an old typewriter; it's on Word.
Bloggers exposed this, or they worked hard to expose this.
You know, blogs are scary. This is what you see.
I see this, and I'm sure scared -- I swear on stage -- shitless about blogs, because this is not something that's friendly.
But there are blogs that are changing the way we read news and consume media, and these are great examples.
These people are reaching thousands, if not millions, of readers, and that's incredibly important.
During the hurricane, you had MSNBC posting about the hurricane on their blog, This was possible because of the easy nature of blogging tools.
You have my friend, who has a blog on PVRs, personal recorders.
He makes enough money just by running ads, to support his family up in Oregon.
That's all he does now, and this is something that blogs have made possible.
And then you have something like this, which is Interplast.
It's a wonderful organization of people and doctors who go to developing nations to offer plastic surgery to those who need it.
Children with cleft palates get it, and they document their story.
This is wonderful.
I am not that caring.
I talk about myself. That's what I am. I'm a blogger.
I have always decided that I was going to be an expert on one thing, and I am an expert on this person, and so I write about it.
So, the short story about my blog: it started in 2001, I was 23.
I wasn't happy with my job, because I was a designer, but I wasn't being really stimulated.
I was an English major in college.
I didn't have any use for it, but I missed writing. So, I started to write a blog and I started to create things like these little stories.
This was an illustration about my camp experience when I was 11 years old, and how I went to a YMCA camp, Christian camp, and basically by the end, I had made my friends hate me so much that I hid in a bunk, They couldn't find me, they sent a search party, and I overheard people saying they wish I had killed myself -- jumped off Bible Peak.
You can laugh, this is OK.
This is me.
This is what happened to me.
And when I started my blog, it was really this one goal -- I said, "I am not going to be famous to the world, but I could be famous to people on the Internet."
And I set a goal. I said, "I'm going to win an award," because I had never won an award in my entire life.
And I said, "I'm going to win the South by Southwest Weblog award."
And I won it -- I reached all of these people, and I had tens of thousands of people reading about my life every day.
And then I wrote a post about a banjo.
I wrote a post about wanting to buy a banjo -- a $300 banjo, which is a lot of money.
And I don't play instruments; I don't know anything about music.
I like music, and I like banjos, and I think I probably heard Steve Martin playing, and I said, "I could do that."
And I said to my husband, "Ben, can I buy a banjo?" And he's like, "No."
And my husband -- this is my husband, who is very hot -- he won an award for being hot.
He told me, "You cannot buy a banjo.
You're just like your dad," who collects instruments.
And I wrote a post about how I was so mad at him, he was such a tyrant -- he would not let me buy this banjo.
And those people who know me understood my joke -- this is Mena, this is how I make a joke at people.
Because the joke in this is that this person is not a tyrant, this person is so loving and so sweet that he lets me dress him up and post pictures of him to my blog.
And if he knew I was showing this right now -- I put this in today -- he would kill me.
But the thing was, my friends read it, and they're like, "Oh, that Mena, she wrote a post about wanting a stupid thing and being stupid."
But I got emails from people that said, "Oh my God, your husband is such an asshole.
How much money does he spend on beer in a year?
You could take that money and buy your banjo.
Why don't you open a separate account?"
I've been with him since I was 17, we've never had a separate bank account.
They said, "Separate your bank account.
Spend your money; spend his money, that's it."
And then I got people saying, "Leave him."
I was like, "OK, what? Who are these people?
And why are they reading this?"
And I realized: I don't want to reach these people.
I don't want to write for this public audience.
And I started to kill my blog slowly.
I'm like, I don't want to write this anymore.
Slowly and slowly -- And I did tell personal stories from time to time.
I wrote this one, and I put this up because of Einstein today.
I'm going to get choked up, because this is my first pet, and she passed away two years ago.
And I decided to break from, "I don't really write about my public life," because I wanted to give her a little memorial.
But anyways, it's these sorts of personal stories -- You know, you read the blogs about politics or about media, and gossip and all these things.
These are out there, but it's more of the personal that interests me, and this is who I am.
You see Norman Rockwell, and you have art critics say, "Norman Rockwell is not art.
Norman Rockwell hangs in living rooms and bathrooms, and this is not something to be considered high art."
And I think this is one of the most important things to us as humans.
These things resonate with us, and, if you think about blogs, you think of high art blogs, the history paintings about, you know, all the biblical stories, and then you have this.
These are the blogs that interest me: the people that just tell stories.
One story is about this baby, and his name is Odin.
His father was a blogger.
And he was writing his blog one day, and his wife gave birth to her baby at 25 weeks.
And he never expected this.
One day, it was normal; the next day, it was hell.
And this is a one-pound baby.
So Odin was documented every single day.
Pictures were taken every day: day one, day two ...
You have day nine -- they're talking about his apnea; day 39 -- he gets pneumonia.
His baby is so small, and I've never encountered such a -- just -- a disturbing image, but just so heartfelt.
And you're reading this as it happens, so on day 55, everybody reads that he's having failures: breathing failures and heart failures, and it's slowing down, and you don't know what to expect.
But then it gets better. Day 96, he goes home.
And you see this post.
That's not something you're going to see in a paper or magazine but this is something this person feels, and people are excited about it -- 28 comments.
That's not a huge amount of people reading, but 28 people matter.
And today, he is a healthy baby, who, if you read his blog -- it's snowdeal.org, his father's blog -- he is taking pictures of him still, because he is still his son and he is, I think, at his age level right now because he had received such great treatment from the hospital.
So, blogs.
So what? You've probably heard these things before.
We talked about the WELL, and about all these sorts of things throughout our online history.
But I think blogs are basically just an evolution, and that's where we are today.
It's this record of who you are, your persona.
You have your Google search, where you say, "What is Mena Trott?"
And then you find these things and you're happy or unhappy.
But then you also find people's blogs, and those are the records of people that are writing daily -- not necessarily about the same topic, but things that interest them.
And we talk about the world flattens, being in this panel, and I am very optimistic -- whenever I think about blogs, I'm like, "We've got to reach all these people."
Hundreds of millions and billions of people.
We're getting into China, we want to be there, but there are so many people that won't have the access to write a blog.
But to see something like the $100 computer is amazing, because blogging software is simple.
We have a successful company because of timing, and because of perseverance, but it's simple stuff -- it's not rocket science.
And so, that's an amazing thing to consider.
So -- the life record of a blog is something that I find incredibly important.
And we started with a slide of my Teds, and I had to add this slide, because I knew the minute I showed this, my mom -- my mom will see this, because she does read my blog and she'll say, "Why wasn't there a picture of me?"
This is my mom. So, I have all the people that I know of.
But this is basically the extent of the family that I know in terms of my direct line.
I showed a Norman Rockwell painting before, and this one, I grew up with, looking at constantly.
I would spend hours looking at the connections, saying, "Oh, the little kid up at the top has red hair; so does that first generation up there."
And it's just these little things.
This is not science, but this was enough for me to be really interested in how we have evolved and how we can trace our line.
So that has always influenced me.
I have this record, this 1910 census, of another Grabowski -- that's my maiden name -- and there's a Theodore, because there's always a Theodore.
This is all I have, a couple of facts about somebody.
I have their date of birth, their age, what they did in their household, if they spoke English, and that's it, that's all I know of these people.
And it's pretty sad, because I only go back five generations, and that's it.
I don't even know what happens on my mom's side, because she's from Cuba and I don't have that many things.
Just doing this, I spent time in the archives -- that's why my husband's a saint -- I spent time in the Washington archives, just sitting there, looking for these things.
Now it's online, but he sat through that.
And so you have this record and -- This is my great-great-grandmother.
This is the only picture I have.
And to think of what we have the ability to do with our blogs; to think about the people that are on those $100 computers, talking about who they are, sharing these personal stories -- this is an amazing thing.
Another photo that has greatly influenced me, or a series of photos, is this project that's done by an Argentinean man and his wife.
And he's basically taking a picture of his family every day for the past, what is '76? -- 20 ... Oh my God, I'm '77 -- 29 years?
Twenty-nine years.
There was a joke, originally, about my graph that I left out, which is: You see all this math? I'm just happy I was able to add it up to 100, because that's my skill set.
So you have these people aging, and now this is them today, or last year.
And that's a powerful thing to have, to be able to track this.
I wish that I would have this of my family.
I know that one day my children will be wondering -- or my grandchildren, or my great-grandchildren, if I ever have children -- what I am going to -- who I was. So I do something that's very narcissistic -- I am a blogger -- that is an amazing thing for me, because it captures a moment in time every day.
I take a picture of myself -- I've been doing this since last year -- every single day.
And, you know, it's the same picture; it's basically the same person.
Only a couple of people read it.
I don't write this for this audience; I'm showing it now, but I would go insane if this was really public.
About four people probably read it, and they tell me, "You haven't updated."
I'm probably going to get people telling me I haven't updated.
But this is amazing, because I can go back to a day -- to April 2005, and say, what was I doing this day?
I look at it, I know exactly.
It's this visual cue that is so important to what we do.
I put the bad pictures up too, because there are bad pictures.
And I remember instantly: I am in Germany in this -- I had to go for a one-day trip.
I was sick, and I was in a hotel room, and I wanted not to be there. And so you see these things, it's not just always smiling.
Now I've kind of evolved it, so I have this look.
If you look at my driver's license, I have the same look, and it's a pretty disturbing thing, but it's something that is really important.
And the last story I really want to tell is this story, because this is probably the one that means the most to me in all of what I'm doing.
I'll probably get choked up, because I tend to when I talk about this.
So, this woman, her name was Emma, and she was a blogger on our service, TypePad.
And she was a beta tester, so she was there right when we opened -- you know, there was 100 people.
And she wrote about her life dealing with cancer.
She was writing and writing, and we all started reading it, because we had so few blogs on the service, we could keep track of everyone.
And she was writing one day, and then she disappeared for a little bit.
And her sister came on, and she said that Emma had passed away.
And all of our support staff who had talked to her were really emotional, and it was a very hard day at the company.
And this was one of those instances where I realized how much blogging affects our relationship, and flattening this sort of world.
That this woman is in England, and she lives -- she lived -- a life where she was talking about what she was doing.
But the big thing that really influenced us was, her sister wrote to me, and she said -- and she wrote on this blog -- that writing her blog during the last couple of months of her life was probably the best thing that had happened to her, and being able to talk to people and to share what was going on, and being able to write and receive comments.
And that was amazing, to be able to know that we had empowered that, and that blogging was something that she felt comfortable doing, and the idea that blogging doesn't have to be scary, that we don't always have to be attack of the blogs, that we can be people who are open, and wanting to help and talk to people.
That was an amazing thing.
And so I printed out and sent a PDF of her blog to her family, and they passed it out at her memorial service, and even in her obituary, they mentioned her blog, because it was such a big part of her life.
And that's a huge thing.
So, this is her legacy, and I think that my call to action to all of you is: think about blogs, think about what they are, think about what you've thought of them, and then actually do it, because it's something that's really going to change our lives.
So, thank you.
I'm Michael Shermer, director of the Skeptics Society, publisher of "Skeptic" magazine.
We investigate claims of the paranormal, pseudo-science, fringe groups and cults, and claims of all kinds between, science and pseudo-science and non-science and junk science, voodoo science, pathological science, bad science, non-science, and plain old non-sense.
And unless you've been on Mars recently, you know there's a lot of that out there.
Some people call us debunkers, which is kind of a negative term.
But let's face it, there's a lot of bunk.
We are like the bunko squads of the police departments out there -- well, we're sort of like the Ralph Naders of bad ideas,  trying to replace bad ideas with good ideas.
I'll show you an example of a bad idea.
I brought this with me, this was given to us by NBC Dateline to test.
It's produced by the Quadro Corporation of West Virginia.
It's called the Quadro 2000 Dowser Rod.
This was being sold to high-school administrators for $900 apiece.
It's a piece of plastic with a Radio Shack antenna attached to it.
You could dowse for all sorts of things, but this particular one was built to dowse for marijuana in students' lockers.
So the way it works is you go down the hallway, and you see if it tilts toward a particular locker, and then you open the locker.
So it looks something like this.
I'll show you.
Well, it has kind of a right-leaning bias.
Well, this is science, so we'll do a controlled experiment.
It'll go this way for sure.
Sir, do you want to empty your pockets, please, sir?
So the question was, can it actually find marijuana in students' lockers?
And the answer is, if you open enough of them, yes.
But in science, we have to keep track of the misses, not just the hits.
And that's probably the key lesson to my short talk here: This is how psychics work, astrologers, tarot card readers and so on.
People remember the hits and forget the misses.
In science, we keep the whole database, and look to see if the number of hits somehow stands out from the total number you'd expect by chance.
In this case, we tested it.
We had two opaque boxes: one with government-approved THC marijuana, and one with nothing.
And it got it 50 percent of the time -- which is exactly what you'd expect with a coin-flip model.
So that's just a fun little example here of the sorts of things we do.
"Skeptic" is the quarterly publication. Each one has a particular theme.
This one is on the future of intelligence.
Are people getting smarter or dumber?
I have an opinion of this myself because of the business I'm in, but in fact, people, it turns out, are getting smarter.
Three IQ points per 10 years, going up.
Sort of an interesting thing.
With science, don't think of skepticism as a thing, or science as a thing.
Are science and religion compatible?
It's like, are science and plumbing compatible?
They're just two different things.
Science is not a thing. It's a verb.
It's a way of thinking about things.
It's a way of looking for natural explanations for all phenomena.
I mean, what's more likely: that extraterrestrial intelligences or multi-dimensional beings travel across vast distances of interstellar space to leave a crop circle in Farmer Bob's field in Puckerbrush, Kansas to promote skeptic.com, our web page?
Or is it more likely that a reader of "Skeptic" did this with Photoshop?
And in all cases we have to ask --  What's the more likely explanation?
Before we say something is out of this world, we should first make sure that it's not in this world.
What's more likely: that Arnold had extraterrestrial help in his run for the governorship, or that the "World Weekly News" makes stuff up?
The same theme is expressed nicely here in this Sidney Harris cartoon.
For those of you in the back, it says here: "Then a miracle occurs.
I think you need to be more explicit here in step two."
This single slide completely dismantles the intelligent design arguments.
There's nothing more to it than that.
You can say a miracle occurs, it's just that it doesn't explain anything or offer anything.
There's nothing to test.
It's the end of the conversation for intelligent design creationists.
And it's true, scientists sometimes throw terms out as linguistic place fillers -- dark energy or dark matter, something like that -- until we figure out what it is, we'll call it this.
It's the beginning of the causal chain for science.
For intelligent design creationists, it's the end of the chain.
So again, we can ask this: what's more likely?
Are UFOs alien spaceships, or perceptual cognitive mistakes, or even fakes?
This is a UFO shot from my house in Altadena, California, looking down over Pasadena.
And if it looks a lot like a Buick hubcap, it's because it is.
You don't even need Photoshop or high-tech equipment, you don't need computers.
This was shot with a throwaway Kodak Instamatic camera.
You just have somebody off on the side with a hubcap ready to go.
Camera's ready -- that's it.
So, although it's possible that most of these things are fake or illusions or so on, and that some of them are real, it's more likely that all of them are fake, like the crop circles.
On a more serious note, in all of science we're looking for a balance between data and theory.
In the case of Galileo, he had two problems when he turned his telescope to Saturn.
First of all, there was no theory of planetary rings.
Second of all, his data was grainy and fuzzy, and he couldn't quite make out what he was looking at.
So he wrote that he had seen -- "I have observed that the furthest planet has three bodies."
And this is what he ended up concluding that he saw.
So without a theory of planetary rings and with only grainy data, you can't have a good theory.
It wasn't solved until 1655.
This is Christiaan Huygens's book that catalogs all the mistakes people made trying to figure out what was going on with Saturn.
It wasn't till Huygens had two things: He had a good theory of planetary rings and how the solar system operated, and he had better telescopic, more fine-grain data in which he could figure out that as the Earth is going around faster -- according to Kepler's Laws -- than Saturn, then we catch up with it.
And we see the angles of the rings at different angles, there.
And that, in fact, turns out to be true.
The problem with having a theory is that it may be loaded with cognitive biases.
So one of the problems of explaining why people believe weird things is that we have things, on a simple level, and then I'll go to more serious ones.
Like, we have a tendency to see faces.
This is the face on Mars.
In 1976, where there was a whole movement to get NASA to photograph that area because people thought this was monumental architecture made by Martians.
Here's the close-up of it from 2001.
If you squint, you can still see the face.
And when you're squinting, you're turning that from fine-grain to coarse-grain, so you're reducing the quality of your data.
And if I didn't tell you what to look for, you'd still see the face, because we're programmed by evolution to see faces.
Faces are important for us socially.
And of course, happy faces, faces of all kinds are easy to see.
You see the happy face on Mars, there.
If astronomers were frogs, perhaps they'd see Kermit the Frog.
Do you see him there? Little froggy legs.
Or if geologists were elephants?
Religious iconography.
Discovered by a Tennessee baker in 1996.
He charged five bucks a head to come see the nun bun till he got a cease-and-desist from Mother Teresa's lawyer.
Here's Our Lady of Guadalupe and Our Lady of Watsonville, just down the street, or is it up the street from here?
Tree bark is particularly good because it's nice and grainy, branchy, black-and-white splotchy and you can get the pattern-seeking -- humans are pattern-seeking animals.
Here's the Virgin Mary on the side of a glass window in Sao Paulo.
Here's when the Virgin Mary made her appearance on a cheese sandwich -- which I got to actually hold in a Las Vegas casino -- of course, this being America.
This casino paid $28,500 on eBay for the cheese sandwich.
But who does it really look like? The Virgin Mary?
It has that sort of puckered lips, 1940s-era look.
Virgin Mary in Clearwater, Florida.
I actually went to see this one.
There was a lot of people there.
The faithful come in their wheelchairs and crutches, and so on.
We went down and investigated.
Just to give you a size, that's Dawkins, me and The Amazing Randi, next to this two, two and a half story-sized image.
All these candles, thousands of candles people had lit in tribute to this.
So we walked around the backside, to see what was going on.
It turns out wherever there's a sprinkler head and a palm tree, you get the effect.
Here's the Virgin Mary on the backside, which they started to wipe off.
I guess you can only have one miracle per building.
So is it really a miracle of Mary, or is it a miracle of Marge?
And now I'm going to finish up with another example of this, with auditory illusions.
There's this film, "White Noise," with Michael Keaton, about the dead talking back to us.
By the way, the whole business of talking to the dead is not that big a deal.
Anybody can do it, turns out.
It's getting the dead to talk back that's the really hard part.
In this case, supposedly, these messages are hidden in electronic phenomena.
There's a ReverseSpeech.com web page where I downloaded this stuff.
Here's the forward version of the very famous song.
It's just a spring clean for the May Queen.
Couldn't you just listen to that all day?
All right, here it is backwards, and see if you can hear the hidden messages that are supposedly in there.   Satan!
What did you get? Audience: Satan! Satan. OK, at least we got "Satan".
Now, I'll prime the auditory part of your brain to tell you what you're supposed to hear, and then hear it again.
You can't miss it when I tell you what's there.
I'm going to just end with a positive, nice little story.
The Skeptics is a nonprofit educational organization.
We're always looking for little good things that people do.
And in England, there's a pop singer.
One of the top popular singers in England today, Katie Melua.
And she wrote a beautiful song.
It was in the top five in 2005, called, "Nine Million Bicycles in Beijing."
It's a love story -- she's sort of the Norah Jones of the UK -- about how she much loves her guy, and compared to nine million bicycles, and so forth.
And she has this one passage here.
We are 12 billion light-years from the edge That's a guess, No one can ever say it's true, But I know that I will always be with you.
Michael Shermer: Well, that's nice. At least she got it close.
In America it'd be, "We're 6,000 light years from the edge."
But my friend, Simon Singh, the particle physicist now turned science educator, who wrote the book "The Big Bang," and so on, uses every chance he gets to promote good science.
And so he wrote an op-ed piece in "The Guardian" about Katie's song, in which he said, well, we know exactly how far from the edge.
You know, it's 13.7 billion light years, and it's not a guess.
We know within precise error bars how close it is.
So we can say, although not absolutely true, it's pretty close to being true.
And, to his credit, Katie called him up after this op-ed piece came out, and said, "I'm so embarrassed. I was in the astronomy club.
I should've known better."
And she re-cut the song.
So I will end with the new version.
We are 13.7 billion light years from the edge of the observable universe.
That's a good estimate with well-defined error bars.
And with the available information, I predict that I will always be with you.
How cool is that?
I love trees, and I'm very lucky, because we live near a wonderful arboretum, and Sundays, usually, I'd go there with my wife and now, with my four-year-old, and we'd climb in the trees, we'd play hide and seek.
The second school I was at had big trees too, had a fantastic tulip tree, I think it was the biggest in the country, and it also had a lot of wonderful bushes and vegetation around it, around the playing fields.
One day I was grabbed by some of my classmates, and taken in the bushes -- I was stripped; I was attacked; I was abused; and this came out of the blue.
Now, the reason I say that, because, afterwards, I was thinking -- well, I went back into the school -- I felt dirty; I felt betrayed; I felt ashamed, but mainly -- mainly, I felt powerless.
And 30 years later I was sitting in an airplane, next to a lady called Veronica, who came from Chile, and we were on a human rights tour, and she was starting to tell me what it was like to be tortured, and, from my very privileged position, this was the only reference point that I had.
And it was an amazing learning experience because, for me, human rights have been something in which I had, you know, a part-time interest, but, mainly, it was something that happened to other people over there.
But I got a phone call from Bono in 1985 and, as you know, he's a great singer, but he's a magnificent hustler, and --  -- a very hard guy to say no to, and he was saying, you know, just after I'd done the Biko song, we're going to do a tour for Amnesty, you have to be on it, and really that was the first time that I'd been out and started meeting people
who'd watched their family being shot in front of them, who'd had a partner thrown out of an airplane into an ocean, and suddenly this world of human rights arrived in my world, and I couldn't really walk away in quite the same way as before.
So I got involved with this tour, which was for Amnesty, and then in '88 I took over Bono's job trying to learn how to hustle.
I didn't do it as well, but we managed to get Youssou N'Dour, Sting, Tracy Chapman, and Bruce Springsteen to go 'round the world for Amnesty, and it was an amazing experience.
And, once again, I got an extraordinary education, and it was the first time, really, that I'd met a lot of these people in the different countries, and these human rights stories became very physical, and, again, I couldn't really walk away quite so comfortably.
But the thing that really amazed me, that I had no idea, was that you could suffer in this way and then have your whole experience, your story, denied, buried and forgotten.
And it seemed that whenever there was a camera around, or a video or film camera, it was a great deal harder to do -- for those in power to bury the story.
And Reebok set up a foundation after these Human Rights Now tours and there was a decision then -- well, we made a proposal, for a couple of years, about trying to set up a division that was going to give cameras to human rights activists.
It didn't really get anywhere, and then the Rodney King incident happened, and people thought, OK, if you have a camera in the right place at the right time, or, perhaps, the wrong time, depending who you are, then you can actually start doing something, and campaigning, and being heard, and telling people about what's going on.
So, WITNESS was started in '92 and it's since given cameras out in over 60 countries.
And we campaign with activist groups and help them tell their story and, in fact, I will show you in a moment one of the most recent campaigns, and I'm afraid it's a story from Uganda, and, although we had a wonderful story from Uganda yesterday, this one isn't quite so good.
In the north of Uganda, there are something like 1.5 million internally displaced people, people who are not refugees in another country, but because of the civil war, which has been going on for about 20 years, they have nowhere to live.
And 20,000 kids have been taken away to become child soldiers, and the International Criminal Court is going after five of the leaders of the -- now, what's it called?
I forget the name of the of the army -- it's Lord's Resistance Army, I believe -- but the government, also, doesn't have a clean sheet, so if we could run the first video.
Woman: Life in the camp is never simple. Even today life is difficult.
We stay because of the fear that what pushed us into the camp ...
still exists back home.
Text: "Between Two Fires: Torture and Displacement in Northern Uganda" Man: When we were at home, it was Kony's [rebel] soldiers disturbing us.
At first, we were safe in the camp.
But later the government soldiers began mistreating us a lot.
Jennifer: A soldier walked onto the road, asking where we'd been.
Evelyn and I hid behind my mother.
Evelyn: He ordered us to sit down, so we sat down.
The other soldier also came.
Jennifer: The man came and started undressing me.
The other one carried Evelyn aside.
The one who was defiling me then left me and went to rape Evelyn.
And the one who was raping Evelyn came and defiled me also.
Man: The soldiers with clubs this long beat us to get a confession.
They kept telling us, "Tell the truth!" as they beat us.
Woman: They insisted that I was lying.
At that moment, they fired and shot off my fingers.
I fell. They ran to join the others ... leaving me for dead.
Text: Uganda ratified the Convention Against Torture in 1986.
Torture is defined as any act by which severe pain of suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted by a person acting in an official capacity to obtain information or a confession, to punish, coerce or intimidate.
Peter Gabriel: So torture is not something that always happens on other soil.
In my country, it was -- we had been looking at pictures of British soldiers beating up young Iraqis; we've got Abu Ghraib; we've got Guantanamo Bay.
I had a driver on my way to Newark Airport, and he told me a story that, in the middle of the night, 4 a.m., he'd been taken out of his home in Queens -- taken to a place in the Midwest, that he was interrogated and tortured and returned to the street four weeks later, because he had the same -- he was Middle Eastern, and he had the same name as one of the 9/11 pilots,
and that may or may not be true -- I didn't think he was a liar, though.
And, I think, if we look around the world, as well as the polar ice caps melting, human rights, which have been fought for, for many hundreds of years in some cases, are, also, eroding very fast, and that is something that we need to take a look at and, maybe, start campaigning for.
I mean, here, too, one of our partners was at Van Jones and the Books Not Bars project -- they have managed, with their footage in California to change the youth correction systems employed, and it's much -- much -- I think, more humane methods are being looked at, how you should lock up young kids, and that's questionable to start off.
And as the story of Mr. Morales, just down the road, excuse me, Mr. Gabriel, would you mind if we delayed your execution a little bit?
No, not at all, no problem, take your time.
But this, surely, whoever that man is, whatever he's done, this is cruel and unusual punishment.
Anyway, WITNESS has been trying to arm the brave people who often put their lives at risk around the world, with cameras, and I'd like to show you just a little more of that. Thank you.
Text: You can say a story is fabricated.
Text: You can say a jury is corrupt.
You can say a person is lying.
You can say you don't trust newspapers.
But you can't say what you just saw never happened.
Help WITNESS give cameras to the world.
Shoot a video; expose injustice; reveal the truth; show us what's wrong with the world; and maybe we can help make it right.
WITNESS.
All the video you have just seen was recorded by human rights groups working with WITNESS.
PG: WITNESS was born of technological innovation -- in a sense the small, portable, DV cam was really what allowed it to come into being.
And we've also been trying to get computers out to the world, so that groups can communicate much more effectively, campaign much more effectively, but now we have the wonderful possibility, which is given to us from the mobile phone with the camera in it, because that is cheap; it's ubiquitous; and it's moving fast all around the world -- and it's very exciting for us.
And so, the dream is that we could have a world in which anyone who has anything bad happen to them of this sort has a chance of getting their story uploaded, being seen, being watched, that they really know that they can be heard, that there would be a giant website, maybe, a little like Google Earth, and you could fly over and find out the realities of what's going,
for the world's inhabitants. In a way what this technology is allowing is, really, that a lot of the problems of the world can have a human face, that we can actually see who's dying of AIDS or who's being beaten up, for the first time, and we can hear their stories in a way that the blogger culture -- if we can move that into these sort of fields, I think we can really transform the world in all sorts of ways.
There could be a new movement growing up, rising from the ground, reaching for the light, and growing strong, just like a tree. Thank you.
I'm Rich Baraniuk and what I'd like to talk a little bit about today are some ideas that I think have just tremendous resonance with all the things that have been talked about the last two days.
So many different points of resonance that it's going to be difficult to bring them all up, but I'll try to do my best.
Does anybody remember these?
OK, so these are LP records and they've been replaced, right?
They've been swept away over the last two decades by these types of world-flattening digitization technologies, right?
And I think it was best witnessed when Thomas was playing the music as we came in the room today.
What's happened in the music world is there's a culture, or an ecosystem that's been created that, if you take some words from Apple, the catchphrase -- that we create, rip, mix and burn.
What I mean by that is that anyone in the world is free and allowed to create new music and musical ideas.
Anyone in the world is allowed to rip or copy musical ideas, use them in innovative ways.
Anyone is allowed to mix them in different types of ways, draw connections between musical ideas, and people can burn them or create final products and continue the circle.
And what that's done is it's created, like I said, a vibrant community that's very inclusive, with people continually working to connect musical ideas, innovate them and keep things constantly up to date.
Today's hit single is not last year's hit single.
But I'm not here to talk about music today.
I'm here to talk about books.
In particular, textbooks and the kind of educational materials that we use every day in school.
Has anyone here ever been to school?
OK, does anybody realize there's a crisis in our schools, around the world?
I'm not going to spend too much time on that, but what I want to talk about is some of the disconnects that appear when an author publishes a book.
That in fact, the publishing process -- just because of the fact that it's complicated, it's heavy, books are expensive -- creates a sort of a wall between authors of books and the ultimate users of books, be they teachers, students or just general readers.
And this is even more true if you happen to speak a language other than one of the world's major languages, and especially English.
I'm going to call these people below the barrier "shutouts" because they're really shut out of the process of being able to share their knowledge with the world.
And so what I want to talk about today is trying to take these ideas that we've seen in the musical culture and try to bring these towards reinventing the way we think about writing books, using them and teaching from them.
So, that's what I'd like to talk about and, really, how we get from where we are now to where we need to go.
The first thing I'd like you to do is a little thought experiment.
Imagine taking all the world's books.
OK, everybody imagine books and imagine just tearing out the pages.
So, liberating these pages and imagine digitizing them and then storing them in a vast, interconnected, global repository.
Think of it as a massive iTunes for book-type content.
And then take that material and imagine making it all open, so that people can modify it, play with it, improve it.
Imagine making it free, so that anyone in the world can have access to all of this knowledge, and imagine using information technology so that you can update this content, improve it, play with it, on a timescale that's more on the order of seconds instead of years.
Instead of editions of a book coming out every two years, imagine them coming out every 25 seconds.
So, imagine we could do that and imagine we could put people into this.
So that we could truly build an ecosystem with not just authors, but all the people who could be or want to be authors in all the different languages of the world, and I think if you could do this, it would be called -- I'm just going to refer to it as a knowledge ecosystem.
So, really, this is the dream, and in a sense what you can think of it is we're trying to enable anyone in the world, I mean anyone in the world --  to be their own educational DJ, creating educational materials, sharing them with the world, constantly innovating on them. So, this is the dream.
In fact, this dream is actually being realized.
Over the last six-and-a-half years, we've been working really hard at Rice University on a project called Connexions, and so what I'd like to do for the rest of the talk is just tell you a little bit about what people are doing with Connexions, which you can kind of think of as the counterpoint to Nicholas Negroponte's talk yesterday, where they're working on the hardware of bringing education to the world.
We're working on the open-source tools and the content.
So, that's sort of to put it in perspective here.
So, create. What are some of the people that are using these kind of tools?
Well, the first thing is, there's a community of engineering professors, from Cambridge to Kyoto, who are developing engineering content in electrical engineering to develop what you can think of as a massive, super textbook that covers the entire area of electrical engineering.
And not only that -- it can be customized for use in each of their own individual institutions.
If people like Kitty Jones, a shut-out -- a private music teacher and mom from Champagne, Illinois, who wanted to share her fantastic music content with the world, on how to teach kids how to play music -- Her material is now used over 600,000 times per month.
Tremendous use.
In fact, a lot of this use coming from United States K-12 schools, because anyone who's involved in a school scale back, the first thing that's cut is the music curriculum.
And so this is just indicating the tremendous thirst for this kind of open, free content.
A lot of teachers are using this stuff.
What about ripping? What about copying, reusing?
A team of volunteers at the University of Texas at El Paso -- graduate students translating this engineering super textbook ideas.
And within about a week, having this be some of our most popular material in widespread use all over Latin America, and in particular in Mexico, because of the open, extensible nature of this.
People, volunteers and even companies that are translating materials into Asian languages like Chinese, Japanese and Thai, to spread the knowledge even further.
OK, what about people who are mixing? What does "mixing" mean?
"Mixing" means building customized courses, means building customized books.
Companies like National Instruments, who are embedding very powerful, interactive simulations into the materials, so that we can go way beyond our regular kind of textbook to an experience that all the teaching materials are things you can actually interact with and play around with and actually learn as you do.
We've been working with Teachers Without Borders, who are very interested in mixing our materials.
They're going to be using Connexions as their platform to develop and deliver teaching materials for teaching teachers how to teach in 84 countries around the world.
TWB is currently in Iraq, training 20,000 teachers supported by USAID.
And to them, this idea of being able to remix and customize to the local context is extraordinarily important, because just providing free content to people has actually been likened by people in the developing world to a kind of cultural imperialism -- that if you don't empower people with the ability to re-contextualize the material, translate it into their own language and take ownership of it, it's not good.
OK, other organizations we've been working with, UC Merced -- people know about UC Merced.
It's a new university in California, in the Central Valley, working very closely with community colleges.
They're actually developing a lot of their science and engineering curriculum to spread widely around the world in our system.
And they're also trying to develop all of their software tools completely open-source.
We've been working with AMD, which has a project called 50x15, which is trying to bring Internet connectivity to 50 percent of the world's population by 2015.
We're going to be providing content to them in a whole range of different languages.
And we've also been working with a number of other organizations.
In particular, a bunch of the projects that are funded by Hewlett Foundation, who have taken a real leadership role in this area of open content.
OK, burn -- I think this is, sort of, quite interesting.
"Burn" is the idea of trying to create the physical instantiation of one of these courses.
And I think a lot of you received -- I think all of you received one of these music books in your gift pack.
A little present for you.
Just to tell you quickly about it: this is an engineering textbook.
It's about 300 pages long, hardbound.
This costs -- anybody guess?
How much would it cost in a bookstore?
65 dollars.
Richard Baraniuk: OK. This costs 22 dollars to the student.
Why does it cost 22 dollars?
Because it's published on demand and it's developed from this repository of open materials.
If this book were to be published by a regular publisher, it would cost at least 122 dollars.
So what we're seeing is moving this burning or publication process from the regular, sort of single-authored book towards community-authored materials that are modular, that are customized to each individual class and published on demand very inexpensively, either pushed out through Amazon or published directly through an on-demand press, like QOOP.
And I think that this is an extraordinarily interesting area because there is tremendous area under this long tail in publishing.
We're not talking about the Harry Potter end, right at the left side.
We're talking about books on hypergeometric partial differential equations.
Books that might sell 100 copies a year, 1,000 copies a year.
There is tremendous sustaining revenue under this long tail to sustain open projects like ours, but also to sustain this new emergence of on-demand publishers, like QOOP, who produced these two books.
And I think one of the things that you should take away from this talk is that there's an impending cut-out-the-middle-man disintermediation, that's going to be happening in the publishing industry.
And it's going to reach a crescendo over the next few years, and I think that it's for our benefit, really, and for the world's benefit.
OK, so what are the enablers?
What's really making all of this happen?
There's tons of technology, and the only piece of technology that I really want to talk about is XML.
How many people know about XML?
So it's the future of the web, right?
It's semantic representation of content.
And what you can really think of XML in this case is it's the packaging that we're putting around these pages.
Remember we took the book, tore the pages out?
Well, what the XML is going to do is it's going to turn those pages into Lego blocks.
XML are the nubs on the Lego that allow us to combine the content together in a myriad different ways, and it provides us a framework to share content.
So, it lets you take this ecosystem in its primordial state of all this content, all the pages you've torn out of books, and create highly sophisticated learning machines: books, courses, course packs.
It gives you the ability to personalize the learning experience to each individual student, so that every student can have a book or a course that's customized to their learning style, their context, their language and the things that excite them.
It lets you reuse the same materials in multiple different ways, and surprising new ways.
It lets you interconnect ideas, indicating how fields relate to each other.
And I'll just give you my personal story.
We came up with this six-and-a-half years ago because I teach the stuff in the red box.
And my day job, as Chris said -- I'm an electrical engineering professor.
I teach signal processing and my challenge was to show that this math -- Wow, about half of you have already fallen asleep just looking at the equation.
But this seemingly dry math is actually the center of this tremendously powerful web that links technology -- that links really cool applications like music synthesizers to tremendous economic opportunities, but also governed by intellectual property.
And the thing that I realized is there was no way that I, as an engineer, could write this book that would get all of this across.
We needed a community to do it and we needed new tools to be able to interconnect these ideas.
And I think that really, in a sense, what we're trying to do is make Minsky's dream come to a reality, where you can imagine all the books in a library actually starting to talk to each other.
And people who are teachers out here -- whoever taught, you know this -- it's the interconnections between ideas that teaching is really all about.
OK, back to math. Imagine -- this is possible: that every single equation that you click on in one of your new e-texts is something that you're going to be able to explore and experiment with.
So imagine your kid's algebra textbook in seventh grade.
You can click on every single equation and bring up a little tool to be able to experiment with it, tinker with it, understand it.
Because we really don't understand until we do.
The same type of mark-up, like MathML, for chemistry.
Imagine chemistry textbooks that actually understand the structure of how molecules are formed.
Imagine Music XML that actually lets you delve into the semantic structure of music, play with it, understand it.
It's no wonder that everybody's getting into it, right?
Even the three wise men.
OK, the second big enabler, and this is where I told a big lie.
The second big enabler is intellectual property.
Because, in fact, I got up here and I talked about how great the music culture is.
We can share and rip, mix and burn, but in fact, that's all illegal.
And we would be accused of [piracy] for doing that, because this music has been propertized.
It's now owned, much of it by big industries.
So, really, the key thing here is we can't let this happen.
We can't let this Napster thing happen here.
So, what we have to do is get it right from the very beginning.
And what we have to do is find an intellectual property framework that makes sharing safe and makes it easily understandable.
And the inspiration here is taken from open-source software.
Things like Linux and the GPL.
The Creative Commons licenses.
How many people have heard of creative commons?
If you have not, you must learn about it.
At the bottom of every piece of material in Connexions and in lots of other projects, you can find their logo.
Clicking on that logo takes you to an absolute no-nonsense, human-readable document, a deed, that tells you exactly what you can do with this content.
In fact, you're free to share it, to do all of these things: to copy it, to change it, even to make commercial use of it, as long as you attribute the author.
Because in academic publishing and much of educational publishing, it's really this idea of sharing knowledge and making impact.
That's why people write, not necessarily making bucks.
We're not talking about Harry Potter, right?
We're at the long tail end here.
Behind that is the legal code, very carefully constructed.
And Creative Commons is taking off -- over 43 million things out there, licensed with a Creative Commons license.
Not just text, but music, images, video.
And there's actually a tremendous uptake of the number of people that are actually licensing music to make it free for people who do this whole idea of re-sampling, ripping, mixing, burning and sharing.
OK, I'd like to conclude with just the last few points.
So, we've built this idea of a commons. People are using it.
We get over 500,000 unique visitors per month, just to our particular site.
MIT OpenCourseWare, which is another large open-content site, gets a similar number of hits. But how do we protect this?
How do we protect it into the future?
And the first thing that people are probably thinking is quality control, right?
Because we're saying that anybody can contribute things to this commons.
Anybody can contribute anything.
So that could be a problem.
It didn't take long until people started contributing materials, for example, on lingerie, which is actually a pretty good module.
The only problem is it's plagiarized from a major French feminist journal, and when you go to the supposed course website, it points to a lingerie-selling website.
So this is a little bit of a problem.
So we clearly need some kind of idea of quality control and this is really where the idea of review and peer review comes in.
You come to TED. Why do you come to TED?
Because Chris and his team have ensured that things are very, very high quality, right?
And so we need to be able to do the same thing.
And we need to be able to design structures, and what we're doing is designing social software to enable anyone to build their own peer review process, and we call these things "lenses."
And basically what they allow is anyone out there can develop their own peer-review process, so that they can focus on the content in the repository that they think is really important.
And you can think of TED as a potential lens.
So I'd just like to end by saying: you can really view this as a call to action.
Connexions and open content is all about sharing knowledge.
All of you here are tremendously imbued with tremendous amounts of knowledge, and what I'd like to do is invite each and every one of you to contribute to this project and other projects of its type, because I think together we can truly change the landscape of education and educational publishing.
So, thanks very much.
I wrote this poem after hearing a pretty well known actress tell a very well known interviewer on television, "I'm really getting into the Internet lately.
I just wish it were more organized."
So ...
If I controlled the Internet, you could auction your broken heart on eBay.
Take the money; go to Amazon; buy a phonebook for a country you've never been to -- call folks at random until you find someone who flirts really well in a foreign language.
If I were in charge of the Internet, you could Mapquest your lover's mood swings.
Hang left at cranky, right at preoccupied, U-turn on silent treatment, all the way back to tongue kissing and good lovin'.
You could navigate and understand every emotional intersection.
Some days, I'm as shallow as a baking pan, but I still stretch miles in all directions.
If I owned the Internet, Napster, Monster and Friendster.com would be one big website.
That way you could listen to cool music while you pretend to look for a job and you're really just chattin' with your pals.
Heck, if I ran the Web, you could email dead people.
They would not email you back  -- but you'd get an automated reply.
Their name in your inbox  -- it's all you wanted anyway.
And a message saying, "Hey, it's me. I miss you.
Listen, you'll see being dead is dandy.
Now you go back to raising kids and waging peace and craving candy."
If I designed the Internet, childhood.com would be a loop of a boy in an orchard, with a ski pole for a sword, trashcan lid for a shield, shouting, "I am the emperor of oranges.
I am the emperor of oranges. I am the emperor of oranges."
Now follow me, OK?
Grandma.com would be a recipe for biscuits and spit-bath instructions.
One, two, three.
That links with hotdiggitydog.com.
That is my grandfather.
They take you to gruff-ex-cop-on-his-fourth-marriage.dad.
He forms an attachment to kind-of-ditzy-but-still-sends-ginger-snaps-for-Christmas.mom, who downloads the boy in the orchard, the emperor of oranges, who grows up to be me -- the guy who usually goes too far.
So if I were emperor of the Internet, I guess I'd still be mortal, huh?
But at that point, I would probably already have the lowest possible mortgage and the most enlarged possible penis  -- so I would outlaw spam on my first day in office.
I wouldn't need it.
I'd be like some kind of Internet genius, and me, I'd like to upgrade to deity and maybe just like that -- pop! -- I'd go wireless.
Huh? Maybe Google would hire this.
I could zip through your servers and firewalls like a virus until the World Wide Web is as wise, as wild and as organized as I think a modern-day miracle/oracle can get, but, ooh-eee, you want to bet just how whack and un-PC your Mac or PC is going to be when I'm rocking hot-shit-hot-shot-god.net?
I guess it's just like life.
It is not a question of if you can -- it's: do ya?
We can interfere with the interface.
We can make "You've got Hallelujah" the national anthem of cyberspace every lucky time we log on.
You don't say a prayer.
You don't write a psalm.
You don't chant an "om."
You send one blessed email to whomever you're thinking of at dah-da-la-dat-da-dah-da-la-dat.com.
Thank you, TED.
My name is Lovegrove.
I only know nine Lovegroves, two of which are my parents.
They are first cousins, and you know what happens when, you know -- So there's a terribly weird freaky side to me, which I'm fighting with all the time. So to try and get through today, I've kind of disciplined myself with an 18-minute talk.
I was hanging on to have a pee.
I thought perhaps if I was hanging on long enough, that would guide me through the 18 minutes.
OK. I am known as Captain Organic and that's a philosophical position as well as an aesthetic position.
But today what I'd like to talk to you about is that love of form and how form can touch people's soul and emotion.
Not very long ago, not many thousands of years ago, we actually lived in caves, and I don't think we've lost that coding system.
We respond so well to form.
But I'm interested in creating intelligent form.
I'm not interested at all in blobism or any of that superficial rubbish that you see coming out as design.
This artificially induced consumerism -- I think it's atrocious.
My world is the world of people like Amory Lovins, Janine Benyus, James Watson.
I'm in that world, but I work purely instinctively.
I'm not a scientist. I could have been, perhaps, but I work in this world where I trust my instincts.
So I am a 21st-century translator of technology into products that we use everyday and relate beautifully and naturally with.
And we should be developing things -- we should be developing packaging for ideas which elevate people's perceptions and respect for the things that we dig out of the earth and translate into products for everyday use.
So, the water bottle.
I'll begin with this concept of what I call DNA.
DNA: Design, Nature, Art. These are the three things that condition my world.
Here is a drawing by Leonardo da Vinci, 500 years ago, before photography.
It shows how observation, curiosity and instinct work to create amazing art.
Industrial design is the art form of the 21st century.
People like Leonardo -- there have not been many -- had this amazingly instinctive curiosity.
I work from a similar position.
I don't want to sound pretentious saying that, but this is my drawing made on a digital pad a couple of years ago -- well into the 21st century, 500 years later.
It's my impression of water.
Impressionism being the most valuable art form on the planet as we know it: 100 million dollars, easily, for a Monet.
I use, now, a whole new process.
A few years ago I reinvented my process to keep up with people like Greg Lynn, Thom Mayne, Zaha Hadid, Rem Koolhaas -- all these people that I think are persevering and pioneering with fantastic new ideas of how to create form.
This is all created digitally.
Here you see the machining, the milling of a block of acrylic.
This is what I show to the client to say, "That's what I want to do."
At that point, I don't know if that's possible at all.
It's a seductor, but I just feel in my bones that that's possible.
So we go, we look at the tooling. We look at how that is produced.
These are the invisible things that you never see in your life.
This is the background noise of industrial design.
That is like an Anish Kapoor flowing through a Richard Serra.
It is more valuable than the product in my eyes. I don't have one.
When I do make some money, I'll have one machined for myself.
This is the final product. When they sent it to me, I thought I'd failed.
It felt like nothing. It has to feel like nothing.
It was when I put the water in that I realized that I'd put a skin on water itself.
It's an icon of water itself, and it elevates people's perception of contemporary design.
Each bottle is different, meaning the water level will give you a different shape.
It's mass individualism from a single product. It fits the hand.
It fits arthritic hands. It fits children's hands.
It makes the product strong, the tessellation.
It's a millefiori of ideas.
In the future, they will look like that, because we need to move away from those type of polymers and use that for medical equipment and more important things, perhaps, in life.
Biopolymers, these new ideas for materials, will come into play in probably a decade.
It doesn't look as cool, does it?
But I can live up to that. I don't have a problem with that.
I design for that condition, biopolymers. It's the future.
I took this video in Cape Town last year.
This is the freaky side coming out.
I have this special interest in things like this, which blow my mind.
I don't know whether to, you know, drop to my knees, cry; I don't know what I think. But I just know that nature -- nature improves with ever-greater purpose and that strangeness is a consequence of innovative thinking.
When I look at these things, they look pretty normal to me.
But these things evolved over many years, and what we're trying to do -- I get three weeks to design a telephone. How the hell do I do that, when you get these things that take hundreds of millions of years to evolve?
How do you condense that?
It comes back to instinct.
I'm not talking about designing telephones that look like that and I'm not looking at designing architecture like that.
I'm just interested in natural growth patterns and the beautiful forms that only nature really creates.
How that flows through me and how that comes out is what I'm trying to understand.
This is a scan through the human forearm. It's then blown up through rapid prototyping to reveal its cellular structure. I have these in my office.
My office is a mixture of the Natural History Museum and a NASA space lab.
It's a weird, kind of freaky place.
This is one of my specimens.
This is made -- bone is made from a mixture of inorganic minerals and polymers.
I studied cooking in school for four years, and in that experience, which was called "domestic science," it was a bit of a cheap trick for me to try and get a science qualification.
Actually, I put marijuana in everything I cooked --  And I had access to all the best girls. It was fabulous.
All the guys in the rugby team couldn't understand.
Anyway -- this is a meringue. This is another sample I have.
A meringue is made exactly the same way, in my estimation, as a bone.
It's made from polysaccharides and proteins.
If you pour water on that, it dissolves.
Could we be manufacturing from foodstuffs in the future?
Not a bad idea. I don't know.
I need to talk to Janine and a few other people about that, but I believe instinctively that that meringue can become something, a car -- I don't know.
I'm also interested in growth patterns: the unbridled way that nature grows things so you're not restricted by form at all.
These interrelated forms, they do inspire everything I do, although I might end up making something incredibly simple.
This is a detail of a chair that I've designed in magnesium.
It shows this interlocution of elements and the beauty of, kind of, engineering and biological thinking, shown pretty much as a bone structure.
Any one of those elements you could sort of hang on the wall as some kind of art object.
It's the world's first chair made in magnesium.
It cost 1.7 million dollars to develop.
It's called "Go," by Bernhardt, USA.
It went into Time magazine in 2001 as the new language of the 21st century.
Boy. For somebody growing up in Wales in a little village, that's enough.
It shows how you make one holistic form, like the car industry, and then you break up what you need.
This is an absolutely beautiful way of working.
It's a godly way of working.
It's organic and it's essential.
It's an absolutely fat-free design, and when you look at it, you see human beings.
When that moves into polymers, you can change the elasticity, the fluidity of the form.
This is an idea for a gas-injected, one-piece polymer chair.
What nature does is it drills holes in things.
I make organic things which are essential.
And they look funky, too -- but I don't set out to make funky things because I think that's an absolute disgrace.
I set out to look at natural forms.
If you took the idea of fractal technology further, take a membrane, shrinking it down constantly like nature does -- that could be a seat for a chair.
It could be a sole for a sports shoe.
It could be a car blending into seats.
Wow. Let's go for it. That's the kind of stuff.
This is what exists in nature. Observation now allows us to bring that natural process into the design process every day. That's what I do.
This is a show that's currently on in Tokyo.
It's called "Superliquidity." It's my sculptural investigation.
It's like 21st-century Henry Moore.
When you see a Henry Moore, still, your hair stands up. There's some amazing spiritual connect.
If he was a car designer, phew, we'd all be driving one.
In his day, he was the highest taxpayer in Britain.
That is the power of organic design.
It contributes immensely to our -- sense of being, our sense of relationships with things, our sensuality and, you know, the sort of -- even the sort of socio-erotic side, which is very important.
This is my artwork. This is all my process.
These actually are sold as artwork. They're very big prints.
But this is how I get to that object.
Ironically, that object was made by the Killarney process, which is a brand-new process here for the 21st century, and I can hear Greg Lynn laughing his socks off as I say that.
I'll tell you about that later.
When I look into these data images, I see new things.
It's self-inspired. Diatomic structures, radiolaria, the things that we couldn't see but we can do now -- these, again, are cored out. They're made virtually from nothing. They're made from silica.
Why not structures from cars like that?
Coral, all these natural forces, take away what they don't need and they deliver maximum beauty.
We need to be in that realm. I want to do stuff like that.
This is a new chair which should come on the market in September.
It's for a company called Moroso in Italy. It's a gas-injected polymer chair.
Those holes you see there are very filtered-down, watered-down versions of the extremity of the diatomic structures.
It goes with the flow of the polymer and you'll see -- there's an image coming up right now that shows the full thing.
It's great to have companies in Italy who support this way of dreaming.
If you see the shadows that come through that, they're actually probably more important than the product, but it's the minimum it takes.
The coring out of the back lets you breathe.
It takes away any material you don't need and it actually garners flexure too.
I was going to break into a dance then.
This is some current work I'm doing.
I'm looking at single-surface structures and how they stretch and flow.
It's based on furniture typologies, but that's not the end motivation.
It's made from aluminum ... as opposed to aluminium, and it's grown.
It's grown in my mind, and then it's grown in terms of the whole process that I go through.
This is two weeks ago in CCP in Coventry, who build parts for Bentleys and so on.
It's being built as we speak and it will be on show in Phillips next year in New York.
I have a big show with Phillips Auctioneers.
When I see these animations, oh Jesus, I'm blown away.
This is what goes on in my studio everyday. I walk -- I'm traveling. I come back.
Some guy's got that on a computer -- there's this like, oh my goodness.
So I try to create this energy of invention every day in my studio.
This kind of effervescent -- fully charged sense of soup that delivers ideas.
Single-surface products. Furniture's a good one.
How you grow legs out of a surface.
I would love to build this one day and perhaps I'd like to build it also out of flour, sugar, polymer, wood chips -- I don't know, human hair.
I don't know. I'd love a go at that. I don't know. If I just got some time.
That's the weird side coming out again. A lot of companies don't understand that.
Three weeks ago I was with Sony in Tokyo.
They said, "Give us the dream. What is our dream? How do we beat Apple?"
I said, "You don't copy Apple, that's for sure.
You get into biopolymers." They looked straight through me.
What a waste. Anyway.  No, it's true. Fuck them. You know, I mean --  I'm delivering; they're not taking. I've had this image 20 years.
I've had this image of a water droplet for 20 years, sitting on a hot bed.
That is an image of a car for me.
That's the car of the future. It's a water droplet.
I've been banging on about this like I can't believe.
Cars are all wrong.
I'm going to show you something a bit weird now.
They laughed everywhere over the world I showed this.
The only place that didn't laugh was Moscow.
Cars are made from 30,000 components.
How ridiculous is that? Couldn't you make that from 300?
It's got a vacuum-formed, carbon-nylon pan.
Everything's holistically integrated. It opens and closes like a bread bin.
There is no engine. There's a solar panel on the back and there are batteries in the wheels; they're fitted like Formula 1.
You take them off your wall, you plug them in. Off you go.
A three-wheeled car: slow, feminine, transparent, so you can see the people in there.
You see that thing. You do. You do.
And not anesthetized, separated from life.
There's a hole at the front and there's a reason for that.
It's a city car. You drive along. You get out.
You drive on to a proboscis. You get out.
It lifts you up.
It presents the solar panel to the sun, and at night, it's a street lamp.
That's what happens if you get inspired by the street lamp first, and do the car second.
I can see these bubbles with these hydrogen packages, floating around on the ground, driven by AI.
When I showed this in South Africa, everybody afterwards was going, "Hey, car on a stick. Like this."
Can you imagine? A car on a stick.
If you put it next to contemporary architecture, it feels totally natural to me.
And that's what I do with my furniture.
I'm not putting Charles Eames' furniture in buildings anymore.
I'm trying to build furniture which fits architecture.
I'm trying to build transportation systems.
I work on aircraft for Airbus, I do all this sort of stuff trying to force these natural, inspired-by-nature dreams home.
I'm going to finish on two things.
This is the stereolithography of a staircase.
It's a little bit of a dedication to James, James Watson.
I built this thing for my studio.
It cost me 250,000 dollars to build this.
Most people go and buy the Aston Martin. I built this.
This is the data that goes with that. Incredibly complex.
Took about two years, because I'm looking for fat-free design.
Lean, efficient things. Healthy products.
This is built by composites.
It's a single element which rotates around to create a holistic element, and this is a carbon-fiber handrail which is only supported in two places.
Modern materials allow us to do modern things.
This is a shot in the studio.
This is how it looks pretty much every day.
You wouldn't want to have a fear of heights coming down it.
There is virtually no handrail. It doesn't pass any standards.
Who cares?
And it has an internal handrail which gives it its strength.
It's this holistic integration. That's my studio. It's subterranean.
It's in Notting Hill, next to all the crap -- the prostitutes and all that stuff.
It's next to David Hockney's original studio.
It has a lighting system that changes throughout the day.
My guys go out for lunch. The door's open. They come back in, because it's normally raining and they prefer to stay in.
This is my studio. Elephant skull from Oxford University, 1988.
I bought that last year. They're very difficult to find.
If anybody's got a whale skeleton they want to sell me, I'll put it in the studio.
So I'm just going to interject a little bit with some of the things that you'll see in the video.
It's a homemade video, made it myself at three o'clock in the morning just to show you how my real world is. You never see that.
You never see architects or designers showing you their real world.
This is called a "Plasnet."
It's a new bio-polycarbonate chair I'm doing in Italy.
World's first bamboo bike with folding handlebars.
We should all be riding one of these.
As China buys all these crappy cars, we should be riding things like this.
Counterbalance.
Like I say, it's a cross between Natural History Museum and a NASA laboratory. It's full of prototypes and objects.
It's self-inspirational, again. I mean, the rare times when I'm there, I do enjoy it.
And I get lots and lots of kids coming.
I'm a contaminator for all those children of investment bankers -- wankers.
Sorry.  That's a solar seed. It's a concept for new architecture.
That thing on the top is the world's first solar-powered garden lamp -- the first produced. Giles Revell should be talking here today -- amazing photography of things you can't see.
The first sculptural model I made for that thing in Tokyo.
Lots of stuff. There's a little leaf chair -- that golden looking thing is called "Leaf."
It's made from Kevlar.
On the wall is my book called "Supernatural," which allows me to remember what I've done, because I forget.
There's an aerated brick I did in Limoges last year, in Concepts for New Ceramics in Architecture.
Gernot Oberfell, working at three o'clock in the morning -- and I don't pay overtime.
Overtime is the passion of design, so join the club or don't.
No, it's true. People like Tom and Greg -- we're traveling like you can't -- we fit it all in.
I don't know how we do it.
Next week I'm at Electrolux in Sweden, then I'm in Beijing on Friday. You work that one out.
And when I see Ed's photographs, I think, why the hell am I going to China?
It's true. It's true.
Because there's a soul in this whole thing.
We need to have a new instinct for the 21st century.
We need to combine all this stuff.
If all the people who were talking over this period worked on a car together, it would be a joy, absolute joy.
So there's a new X-light system I'm doing in Japan.
There's Tuareg shoes from North Africa. There's a Kifwebe mask.
These are my sculptures.
A copper jelly mold.
It sounds like some quiz show or something, doesn't it?
So, it's going to end.
Thank you, James, for your great inspiration.
Thank you very much.
I'm going to give you four specific examples, I'm going to cover at the end about how a company called Silk tripled their sales; how an artist named Jeff Koons went from being a nobody to making a whole bunch of money and having a lot of impact; to how Frank Gehry redefined what it meant to be an architect.
And one of my biggest failures as a marketer in the last few years -- a record label I started that had a CD called "Sauce."
Before I can do that I've got to tell you about sliced bread, and a guy named Otto Rohwedder.
Now, before sliced bread was invented in the 1910s I wonder what they said? Like the greatest invention since the telegraph or something.
But this guy named Otto Rohwedder invented sliced bread, and he focused, like most inventors did, on the patent part and the making part.
And the thing about the invention of sliced bread is this -- that for the first 15 years after sliced bread was available no one bought it; no one knew about it; it was a complete and total failure.
And the reason is that until Wonder came along and figured out how to spread the idea of sliced bread, no one wanted it.
That the success of sliced bread, like the success of almost everything we've talked about at this conference, is not always about what the patent is like, or what the factory is like -- it's about can you get your idea to spread, or not.
And I think that the way you're going to get what you want, or cause the change that you want to change, to happen, is to figure out a way to get your ideas to spread.
And it doesn't matter to me whether you're running a coffee shop or you're an intellectual, or you're in business, or you're flying hot air balloons.
I think that all this stuff applies to everybody regardless of what we do.
That what we are living in is a century of idea diffusion.
That people who can spread ideas, regardless of what those ideas are, win.
When I talk about it I usually pick business, because they make the best pictures that you can put in your presentation, and because it's the easiest sort of way to keep score.
But I want you to forgive me when I use these examples because I'm talking about anything that you decide to spend your time to do.
At the heart of spreading ideas is TV and stuff like TV.
TV and mass media made it really easy to spread ideas in a certain way.
I call it the "TV-industrial complex."
The way the TV-industrial complex works, is you buy some ads, interrupt some people, that gets you distribution.
You use the distribution you get to sell more products.
You take the profit from that to buy more ads.
And it goes around and around and around, the same way that the military-industrial complex worked a long time ago.
That model of, and we heard it yesterday -- if we could only get onto the homepage of Google, if we could only figure out how to get promoted there, or grab that person by the throat, and tell them about what we want to do.
If we did that then everyone would pay attention, and we would win.
Well, this TV-industrial complex informed my entire childhood and probably yours.
I mean, all of these products succeeded because someone figured out how to touch people in a way they weren't expecting, in a way they didn't necessarily want, with an ad, over and over again until they bought it.
And the thing that's happened is, they canceled the TV-industrial complex.
That just over the last few years, what anybody who markets anything has discovered is that it's not working the way that it used to.
This picture is really fuzzy, I apologize; I had a bad cold when I took it.
But the product in the blue box in the center is my poster child.
I go to the deli; I'm sick; I need to buy some medicine.
The brand manager for that blue product spent 100 million dollars trying to interrupt me in one year.
100 million dollars interrupting me with TV commercials and magazine ads and Spam and coupons and shelving allowances and spiff -- all so I could ignore every single message. And I ignored every message because I don't have a pain reliever problem.
I buy the stuff in the yellow box because I always have.
And I'm not going to invest a minute of my time to solve her problem, because I don't care.
Here's a magazine called "Hydrate." It's 180 pages about water.
Articles about water, ads about water.
Imagine what the world was like 40 years ago, with just the Saturday Evening Post and Time and Newsweek.
Now there are magazines about water.
New product from Coke Japan: water salad.
Coke Japan comes out with a new product every three weeks, because they have no idea what's going to work and what's not.
I couldn't have written this better myself. It came out four days ago -- I circled the important parts so you can see them here.
Arby's is going to spend 85 million dollars promoting an oven mitt with the voice of Tom Arnold, hoping that that will get people to go to Arby's and buy a roast beef sandwich.
Now, I had tried to imagine what could possibly be in an animated TV commercial featuring Tom Arnold, that would get you to get in your car, drive across town and buy a roast beef sandwich.
Now, this is Copernicus, and he was right, when he was talking to anyone who needs to hear your idea.
"The world revolves around me." Me, me, me, me. My favorite person -- me.
I don't want to get email from anybody; I want to get "memail."
So consumers, and I don't just mean people who buy stuff at the Safeway; I mean people at the Defense Department who might buy something, or people at, you know, the New Yorker who might print your article.
Consumers don't care about you at all; they just don't care.
Part of the reason is -- they've got way more choices than they used to, and way less time.
And in a world where we have too many choices and too little time, the obvious thing to do is just ignore stuff.
And my parable here is you're driving down the road and you see a cow, and you keep driving because you've seen cows before.
Cows are invisible. Cows are boring.
Who's going to stop and pull over and say -- "Oh, look, a cow." Nobody.
But if the cow was purple -- isn't that a great special effect?
I could do that again if you want.
If the cow was purple, you'd notice it for a while.
I mean, if all cows were purple you'd get bored with those, too.
The thing that's going to decide what gets talked about, what gets done, what gets changed, what gets purchased, what gets built, is: "Is it remarkable?"
And "remarkable" is a really cool word, because we think it just means "neat," but it also means "worth making a remark about."
And that is the essence of where idea diffusion is going.
That two of the hottest cars in the United States is a 55,000-dollar giant car, big enough to hold a Mini in its trunk.
People are paying full price for both, and the only thing they have in common is that they don't have anything in common.
Every week, the number one best-selling DVD in America changes.
It's never "The Godfather," it's never "Citizen Kane," it's always some third-rate movie with some second-rate star.
But the reason it's number one is because that's the week it came out.
Because it's new, because it's fresh.
People saw it and said "I didn't know that was there" and they noticed it.
Two of the big success stories of the last 20 years in retail -- one sells things that are super-expensive in a blue box, and one sells things that are as cheap as they can make them.
The only thing they have in common is that they're different.
We're now in the fashion business, no matter what we do for a living, we're in the fashion business.
And people in the fashion business know what it's like to be in the fashion business -- they're used to it.
The rest of us have to figure out how to think that way.
How to understand that it's not about interrupting people with big full-page ads, or insisting on meetings with people.
But it's a totally different sort of process that determines which ideas spread, and which ones don't.
They sold a billion dollars' worth of Aeron chairs by reinventing what it meant to sell a chair.
They turned a chair from something the purchasing department bought, to something that was a status symbol about where you sat at work.
This guy, Lionel Poilne, the most famous baker in the world -- he died two and a half months ago, and he was a hero of mine and a dear friend.
He lived in Paris. Last year, he sold 10 million dollars' worth of French bread.
Every loaf baked in a bakery he owned, by one baker at a time, in a wood-fired oven.
And when Lionel started his bakery, the French pooh-pooh-ed it.
They didn't want to buy his bread. It didn't look like "French bread."
It wasn't what they expected.
It was neat; it was remarkable; and slowly, it spread from one person to another person until finally, it became the official bread of three-star restaurants in Paris.
Now he's in London, and he ships by FedEx all around the world.
What marketers used to do is make average products for average people.
That's what mass marketing is.
Smooth out the edges; go for the center; that's the big market.
They would ignore the geeks, and God forbid, the laggards.
It was all about going for the center.
But in a world where the TV-industrial complex is broken, I don't think that's a strategy we want to use any more.
I think the strategy we want to use is to not market to these people because they're really good at ignoring you.
But market to these people because they care.
These are the people who are obsessed with something.
And when you talk to them, they'll listen, because they like listening -- it's about them.
And if you're lucky, they'll tell their friends on the rest of the curve, and it'll spread.
It'll spread to the entire curve.
They have something I call "otaku" -- it's a great Japanese word.
It describes the desire of someone who's obsessed to say, drive across Tokyo to try a new ramen noodle place, because that's what they do: they get obsessed with it.
To make a product, to market an idea, to come up with any problem you want to solve that doesn't have a constituency with an otaku, is almost impossible.
Instead, you have to find a group that really, desperately cares about what it is you have to say.
Talk to them and make it easy for them to tell their friends.
There's a hot sauce otaku, but there's no mustard otaku.
That's why there's lots and lots of kinds of hot sauces, and not so many kinds of mustard.
Not because it's hard to make interesting mustard -- you could make interesting mustard -- but people don't, because no one's obsessed with it, and thus no one tells their friends.
Krispy Kreme has figured this whole thing out.
It has a strategy, and what they do is, they enter a city, they talk to the people, with the otaku, and then they spread through the city to the people who've just crossed the street.
This yoyo right here cost 112 dollars, but it sleeps for 12 minutes.
Not everybody wants it but they don't care.
They want to talk to the people who do, and maybe it'll spread.
These guys make the loudest car stereo in the world.
It's as loud as a 747 jet.
You can't get in, the car's got bulletproof glass, because it'll blow out the windshield otherwise.
But the fact remains that when someone wants to put a couple of speakers in their car, if they've got the otaku or they've heard from someone who does, they go ahead and they pick this.
It's really simple -- you sell to the people who are listening, and just maybe, those people tell their friends.
So when Steve Jobs talks to 50,000 people at his keynote, who are all tuned in from 130 countries watching his two-hour commercial -- that's the only thing keeping his company in business -- it's that those 50,000 people care desperately enough to watch a two-hour commercial, and then tell their friends.
Pearl Jam, 96 albums released in the last two years.
Every one made a profit. How?
They only sell them on their website.
Those people who buy them have the otaku, and then they tell their friends, and it spreads and it spreads.
This hospital crib cost 10,000 dollars, 10 times the standard.
But hospitals are buying it faster than any other model.
Hard Candy nail polish, doesn't appeal to everybody, but to the people who love it, they talk about it like crazy.
This paint can right here saved the Dutch Boy paint company, making them a fortune. It costs 35 percent more than regular paint because Dutch Boy made a can that people talk about, because it's remarkable.
They didn't just slap a new ad on the product; they changed what it meant to build a paint product.
AmIhotornot.com -- everyday 250,000 people go to this site, run by two volunteers, and I can tell you they are hard graders --  They didn't get this way by advertising a lot.
They got this way by being remarkable, sometimes a little too remarkable.
And this picture frame has a cord going out the back, and you plug it into the wall.
My father has this on his desk, and he sees his grandchildren everyday, changing constantly.
And every single person who walks into his office hears the whole story of how this thing ended up on his desk.
And one person at a time, the idea spreads.
These are not diamonds, not really.
They're made from "cremains."
After you're cremated you can have yourself made into a gem.
Oh, you like my ring? It's my grandmother.
Fastest-growing business in the whole mortuary industry.
But you don't have to be Ozzie Osborne -- you don't have to be super-outrageous to do this.
What you have to do is figure out what people really want and give it to them.
A couple of quick rules to wrap up.
The first one is: Design is free when you get to scale.
The people who come up with stuff that's remarkable more often than not figure out how to put design to work for them.
Number two: The riskiest thing you can do now is be safe.
Proctor and Gamble knows this, right?
is always about average products for average people.
That's risky.
The safe thing to do now is to be at the fringes, be remarkable.
And being very good is one of the worst things you can possibly do.
Very good is boring. Very good is average.
It doesn't matter whether you're making a record album, or you're an architect, or you have a tract on sociology.
If it's very good, it's not going to work, because no one's going to notice it.
So my three stories.
Silk put a product that does not need to be in the refrigerated section next to the milk in the refrigerated section.
Sales tripled. Why?
Milk, milk, milk, milk, milk -- not milk.
For the people who were there and looking at that section, it was remarkable.
They didn't triple their sales with advertising; they tripled it by doing something remarkable.
That is a remarkable piece of art. You don't have to like it, but a 40-foot tall dog made out of bushes in the middle of New York City is remarkable.  Frank Gehry didn't just change a museum; he changed an entire city's economy by designing one building that people from all over the world went to see.
Now, at countless meetings at, you know, the Portland City Council, or who knows where, they said, we need an architect -- can we get Frank Gehry?
Because he did something that was at the fringes.
And my big failure? I came out with an entire --  A record album and hopefully a whole bunch of record albums in SACD, this remarkable new format -- and I marketed it straight to people with 20,000-dollar stereos.
People with 20,000-dollar stereos don't like new music.
So what you need to do is figure out who does care.
Who is going to raise their hand and say, "I want to hear what you're doing next," and sell something to them.
The last example I want to give you.
This is a map of Soap Lake, Washington.
As you can see, if that's nowhere, it's in the middle of it.
But they do have a lake.
And people used to come from miles around to swim in the lake.
They don't anymore. So the founding fathers said, "We've got some money to spend.
What can we build here?" And like most committees, they were going to build something pretty safe.
And then an artist came to them -- this is a true artist's rendering -- he wants to build a 55-foot tall lava lamp in the center of town.
That's a purple cow; that's something worth noticing.
I don't know about you, but if they build it, that's where I'm going to go.
Thank you very much for your attention.
You'll be happy to know that I'll be talking not about my own tragedy, but other people's tragedy.
It's a lot easier to be lighthearted about other people's tragedy than your own, and I want to keep it in the spirit of the conference.
So, if you believe the media accounts, being a drug dealer in the height of the crack cocaine epidemic was a very glamorous life, in the words of Virginia Postrel.
There was money, there was drugs, guns, women, you know, you name it -- jewelry, bling-bling -- it had it all.
What I'm going to tell you today is that, in fact, based on 10 years of research, a unique opportunity to go inside a gang -- to see the actual books, the financial records of the gang -- that the answer turns out not to be that being in the gang was a glamorous life.
But I think, more realistically, that being in a gang -- selling drugs for a gang -- is perhaps the worst job in all of America.
And that's what I'd like to convince you of today.
So there are three things I want to do.
First, I want to explain how and why crack cocaine had such a profound influence on inner-city gangs.
Secondly, I want to tell you how somebody like me came to be able to see the inner workings of a gang -- an interesting story, I think.
And then third, I want to tell you, in a very superficial way, about some of the things we found when we actually got to look at the financial records, the books, of the gang. So before I do that, just one warning, which is that this presentation has been rated 'R' It contains adult themes, adult language.
Given who is up on the stage, you'll be delighted to know that, in fact, there'll be no nudity --  Unexpected wardrobe malfunctions aside.
So let me start by talking about crack cocaine, and how it transformed the gang.
To do that, you have to actually go back to a time before crack cocaine, in the early '80s, and look at it from the perspective of a gang leader.
Being a gang leader in the inner city wasn't such a bad deal in the mid-'80s -- the early '80s, let me say.
Now, you had a lot of power, and you got to beat people up -- you got a lot of prestige, a lot of respect.
But the thing is, there was no money in it.
The gang had no way to make money.
You couldn't charge dues to the people in the gang, because the people in the gang didn't have any money.
You couldn't really make any money selling marijuana -- marijuana's too cheap, it turns out.
You can't get rich selling marijuana.
You couldn't sell cocaine; cocaine's a great product -- powdered cocaine -- but you've got to know rich white people.
And most of the inner-city gang members didn't know any rich white people, so couldn't sell to that market.
You couldn't really do petty crime, either.
Turns out, petty crime's a terrible way to make a living.
As a result, as a gang leader, you had, you know, power -- it's a pretty good life -- but the thing was, in the end, you were living at home with your mother.
And so it wasn't really a career.
There were limits to how powerful and important you could be if you had to live at home with your mother.
Then along comes crack cocaine.
And in the words of Malcolm Gladwell, crack cocaine was the extra-chunky version of tomato sauce for the inner city.
Because crack cocaine was an unbelievable innovation.
I don't have time to talk about it today, but if you think about it, I would say that in the last 25 years, of every invention or innovation that's occurred in this country, the biggest one in terms of impact on the well-being of people who live in the inner city, was crack cocaine.
And for the worse -- not for the better, but for the worse.
It had a huge impact on life.
So what was it about crack cocaine?
It was a brilliant way of getting the brain high.
Because you could smoke crack cocaine -- you can't smoke powdered cocaine -- and smoking is a much more efficient mechanism of delivering a high than snorting it.
And it turned out there was this audience that didn't know it wanted crack cocaine, but when it came, it really did.
And it was a perfect drug; you could buy the cocaine that went into it for a dollar, sell it for five dollars.
Highly addictive -- the high was very short.
So for fifteen minutes, you get this great high, and then when you come down, all you want to do is get high again.
It created a wonderful market.
And for the people who were there running the gang, it was a great way, seemingly, to make a lot of money.
At least for the people on the top.
So this is where we enter the picture.
Not really me -- I'm really a bit player in all this.
My co-author, Sudhir Venkatesh, is the main character.
He was a math major in college who had a good heart, and decided he wanted to get a sociology PhD, came to the University of Chicago.
Now, the three months before he came to Chicago, he had spent following the Grateful Dead.
And in his own words, he "looked like a freak."
He's a South Asian -- very dark-skinned South Asian.
Big man, and he had hair, in his words, "down to his ass."
Defied all kinds of boundaries: Was he black or white? Was he man or woman?
He was really a curious sight to be seen.
So he showed up at the University of Chicago, and the famous sociologist William Julius Wilson was doing a book that involved surveying people all across Chicago.
He took one look at Sudhir, who was going to go do some surveys for him, and decided he knew exactly the place to send him, which was to one of the toughest, most notorious housing projects not just in Chicago, but in the entire United States.
So Sudhir, the suburban boy who had never really been in the inner city, dutifully took his clipboard and walked down to this housing project, gets to the first building.
The first building? Well, there's nobody there.
But he hears some voices up in the stairwell, so he climbs up the stairwell, comes around the corner, and finds a group of young African-American men playing dice.
This is about 1990, peak of the crack epidemic.
This is a very dangerous job, being in a gang. You don't like to be surprised.
You don't like to be surprised by people who come around the corner.
And the mantra was: shoot first; ask questions later.
Now, Sudhir was lucky -- he was such a freak, and that clipboard probably saved his life, because they figured no other rival gang member would be coming up to shoot at them with a clipboard.
So his greeting was not particularly warm, but they did say, well, OK -- let's hear your questions on your survey.
the first question on the survey that he was sent to ask was: "How do you feel about being poor and Black in America?"  Makes you wonder about academics.
So the choice of answers were: [A) Very Good B) Good C) Bad D) Very Bad] What Sudhir found out is, in fact, that the real answer was the following: [A) Very Good B) Good C) Bad D) Very Bad E) Fuck you]  The survey was not, in the end, going to be what got Sudhir off the hook.
He was held hostage overnight in the stairwell.
There was a lot of gunfire, there were a lot of philosophical discussions he had with the gang members.
By morning, the gang leader arrived, checked out Sudhir, decided he was no threat, and they let him go home.
So Sudhir went home, took a shower, took a nap.
And you and I, probably, faced with the situation, would think, "I guess I'm going to write my dissertation on The Grateful Dead, I've been following them for the last three months."
Sudhir, on the other hand, got right back, walked down to the housing project, went up to the second floor, and said: "Hey, guys, I had so much fun hanging out with you last night, I wonder if I could do it again tonight."
And that was the beginning of what turned out to be a beautiful relationship that involved Sudhir living in the housing project on and off for 10 years, hanging out in crack houses, going to jail with the gang members, having the windows shot out of his car, having the police break into his apartment and steal his computer disks -- you name it.
But ultimately, the story has a happy ending for Sudhir, who became one of the most respected sociologists in the country.
And especially for me, as I sat in my office with my Excel spreadsheet open, waiting for Sudhir to come and deliver to me the latest load of data that he would get from the gang.
It was one of the most unequal co-authoring relationships ever --  But I was glad to be the beneficiary of it.
What did we find in the gang? Well, let me say one thing: We really got access to everybody in the gang.
We got an inside look at the gang, from the very bottom up to the very top.
They trusted Sudhir, in ways that really no academic has ever -- or really anybody, any outsider -- has ever earned the trust of these gangs, to the point where they actually opened up what was most interesting for me -- their books, the financial records they kept.
They made them available to us, and we not only could study them, but we could ask them questions about what was in them.
So if I have to kind of summarize very quickly in the short time I have what the bottom line of what I take away from the gang is, it's that, if I had to draw a parallel between the gang and any other organization, it would be that the gang is just like McDonald's, in a lot of different respects -- the restaurant McDonald's.
which isn't maybe the most interesting way, but it's a good way to start -- is in the way it's organized, the hierarchy of the gang, the way it looks.
So here's what the org chart of the gang looks like.
I don't know if you know much about org charts, but if you were to assign a stripped-down and simplified McDonald's org chart, this is exactly what it would look like.
It's amazing, but the top level of the gang, they actually call themselves the "Board of Directors."
And Sudhir says it's not like these guys had a very sophisticated view of what happened in American corporate life, but they had seen movies like "Wall Street," and they had learned a little bit about what it was like to be in the real world.
Now, below that board of directors, you've got essentially what are regional VPs -- people who control, say, the South Side of Chicago, or the West Side of Chicago.
Sudhir got to know very well the guy who had the unfortunate assignment of trying to take the Iowa franchise, which, it turned out, for this black gang, was not one of the more brilliant financial endeavors they undertook.
But the thing that really makes the gang seem like McDonald's is its franchisees.
The guys who are running the local gangs -- the four-square-block by four-square-block areas -- they're just like the guys, in some sense, who are running the McDonald's.
They are the entrepreneurs.
They get the exclusive property rights to control the drug-selling.
They get the name of the gang behind them, for merchandising and marketing.
And they're the ones who basically make the profit or lose a profit, depending on how good they are at running the business.
Now, the group I really want you to think about, though, are the ones at the bottom -- the foot soldiers.
These are the teenagers, typically, who'd be standing out on the street corner, selling the drugs.
Extremely dangerous work.
And important to note is that almost all of the weight, all of the people in this organization are at the bottom -- just like McDonald's.
So in some sense, the foot soldiers are a lot like the people who are taking your order at McDonald's, and it's not just by chance that they're like them.
In fact, in these neighborhoods, they'd be the same people.
So the same kids who are working in the gang were actually, at the very same time, typically working part-time at a place like McDonald's.
Which already foreshadows the main result that I've talked about, about what a crappy job it was, being in the gang.
Because obviously, if being in the gang were such a wonderful, lucrative job, why in the world would these guys moonlight at McDonald's?
So what do the wages look like? You might be surprised.
But based on being able to talk to them and to see their records, this is what it looks like in terms of the wages.
The hourly wage the foot soldiers were earning was $3.50 an hour.
It was below the minimum wage. And this is well-documented.
It's easy to see by the patterns of consumption they have.
It really is not fiction -- it's fact.
There was very little money in the gang, especially at the bottom.
Now if you managed to rise up, say, and be that local leader, the guy who's the equivalent of the McDonald's franchisee, you'd be making 100,000 dollars a year.
And that, in some ways, was the best job you could hope to get if you were growing up in one of these neighborhoods as a young black male.
If you managed to rise to the very top, 200,000 or 400,000 dollars a year is what you'd hope to make.
Truly, you would be a great success story.
And one of the sad parts of this is that, indeed, among the many other ramifications of crack cocaine is that the most talented individuals in these communities -- this is what they were striving for.
They weren't trying to make it in legitimate ways, because there were no legitimate channels out.
This was the best way out.
And it actually was the right choice, probably, to try to make it out this way.
You look at this, the relationship to McDonald's breaks down here.
The money looks about the same.
Why is it such a bad job?
Well, the reason it's such a bad job is that there's somebody shooting at you a lot of the time.
So, with shooting at you, what are the death rates?
this was a time of intense violence, of a lot of gang wars, as this gang actually became quite successful.
But there were costs.
And so the death rate -- not to mention the rate of being arrested, sent to prison, being wounded -- the death rate in our sample was seven percent per person per year.
You're in the gang for four years, you expect to die with about a 25 percent likelihood.
That is about as high as you can get.
So for comparison's purposes, let's think about some other walk of life you may expect might be extremely risky.
Let's say that you were a murderer and you were convicted of murder, and you're sent to death row.
It turns out, the death rates on death row from all causes, including execution: two percent a year.
So it's a lot safer being on death row than it is selling drugs out on the street.
That gives you some pause, for those of you who believe that a death penalty's going to have an enormous deterrent effect on crime.
To give you a sense of just how bad the inner city was during crack -- and I'm not really focusing on the negatives, but really, there's another story to tell you there -- if you look at the death rates just of random, young black males growing up in the inner city in the United States, the death rates during crack were about one percent.
That's extremely high.
And this is violent death -- it's unbelievable, in some sense.
To put it into perspective: if you compare this to the soldiers in Iraq, for instance, right now fighting the war: 0.5 percent.
So in some very literal way, the young black men who were growing up in this country were living in a war zone, very much in the sense that the soldiers over in Iraq are fighting in a war.
So why in the world, you might ask, would anybody be willing to stand out on a street corner selling drugs for $3.50 an hour, with a 25 percent chance of dying over the next four years?
Why would they do that? And I think there are a couple answers.
I think the first one is that they got fooled by history.
It used to be the gang was a rite of passage; that as you got older, you dropped out of the gang.
So what happened was, the people who happened to be in the right place at the right time -- the people who happened to be leading the gang in the mid-to-late-'80s -- became very, very wealthy.
And so the logical thing to think was that they are going to age out of the gang like everybody else has, and the next generation is going to take over and get the wealth.
There are striking similarities, I think, to the Internet boom.
The first set of people in Silicon Valley got very, very rich.
And then all of my friends said, "Maybe I should go do that, too."
And they were willing to work very cheap for stock options that never came.
In some sense, that's what happened, exactly, to the set of people we were looking at. They were willing to start at the bottom, just like, say, a first-year lawyer at a law firm is willing to start at the bottom, work 80-hour weeks for not that much money, because they think they're going to make partner.
But the rules changed, and they never got to make partner.
Indeed, the same people who were running all of the major gangs in the late 1980s are still running the major gangs in Chicago today.
They never passed on any of the wealth, So everybody got stuck at that $3.50-an-hour job, and it turned out to be a disaster.
The other thing the gang was very good at was marketing and trickery.
And so for instance, one thing the gang would do is -- the gang leaders would have big entourages, and they'd drive fancy cars and have fancy jewelry.
So what Sudhir eventually realized as he hung out with them more, is that, really, they didn't own those cars -- they just leased them, because they couldn't afford to own the fancy cars.
And they didn't really have gold jewelry, they had gold-plated jewelry.
It goes back to, you know, the real-real versus the fake-real.
And really, they did all sorts of things to trick the young people into thinking what a great deal the gang was going to be.
So for instance, they would give a 14-year-old kid a whole roll of bills to hold.
That 14-year-old kid would say to his friends, "Hey, look at all the money I got in the gang."
It wasn't his money -- until he spent it, and then he was in debt to the gang, and was sort of an indentured servant for a while.
So I have a couple minutes.
Let me do one last thing I hadn't thought I'd have time to do, which is to talk about what we learned more generally about economics, from the study of the gang.
So, economists tend to talk in technical words.
Often, our theories fail quite miserably when we over the data, but what's kind of interesting is that in this setting, it turned out that some of the economic theories that worked not so well in the real economy in some sense, because it's unfettered capitalism.
Here's an economic principle.
This is one of the basic ideas in labor economics, called a "compensating differential."
It's the idea that the increment to wages that a worker requires to leave him indifferent between performing two tasks, one which is more unpleasant than the other.
Compensating differential -- it's why we think garbagemen might be paid more than people who work in parks.
The words of one of the members of the gang, I think, make this clear.
So it turns out -- I'm sort of getting ahead of myself -- it turns out, in the gang, when there's a war going on, they actually pay the foot soldiers twice as much money.
It's exactly this concept.
Because they're not willing to be at risk.
And the words of a gang member capture it quite nicely, he says: "Would you stand around here when all this shit ..." -- the shooting -- "... if all this shit's going on? No, right?
So if I gonna be asked to put my life on the line, then front me the cash, man."
I think the gang member says it much more articulately than the economist, about what's going on.
Here's another one.
Economists talk about game theory, that every two-person game has a Nash equilibrium.
Here's the translation you get from the gang member.
They're talking about the decision of why they don't go shoot -- One thing that turns out to be a great business tactic in the gang: if you go and just shoot guns in the air in the other gang's territory -- people are afraid to go buy drugs there, they're going to come into your neighborhood.
Here's what he says about why they don't do that: "If we start shooting around there, the other gang's territory, nobody, I mean, you dig it, nobody gonna step on their turf.
But we gotta be careful, 'cause they can shoot around here too and then we all fucked."
So that's the same concept.
Then again, sometimes economists get it wrong.
One thing we observed in the data is that it looked like -- the gang leader always got paid.
No matter how bad it was economically, he always got himself paid.
We had some theories related to cash flow, and lack of access to capital markets, and things like that.
Then we asked the gang member, "Why is it you always get paid and your workers don't always get paid?"
His response is, "You got all these niggers below you who want your job, you dig?
If you start taking losses, they see you as weak and shit."
And I thought about it and said, "CEOs often pay themselves million-dollar bonuses, even when companies are losing a lot of money.
And it never would really occur to an economist that this idea of 'weak and shit' could really be important."
Maybe "weak and shit" is an important hypothesis that needs more analysis.
Thank you very much.
Once upon a time, there was a dread disease that afflicted children.
And in fact, among all the diseases that existed in this land, it was the worst. It killed the most children.
And along came a brilliant inventor, a scientist, who came up with a partial cure for that disease.
And it wasn't perfect. Many children still died, but it was certainly better than what they had before.
And one of the good things about this cure was that it was free, virtually free, and was very easy to use.
But the worst thing about it was that you couldn't use it on the youngest children, on infants, and on one-year-olds.
And so, as a consequence, a few years later, another scientist -- perhaps maybe this scientist not quite as brilliant as the one who had preceded him, but building on the invention of the first one -- came up with a second cure.
And the beauty of the second cure for this disease was that it could be used on infants and one-year-olds.
And the problem with this cure was it was very expensive, and it was very complicated to use.
And although parents tried as hard as they could to use it properly, almost all of them ended up using it wrong in the end.
But what they did, of course, since it was so complicated and expensive, they only used it on the zero-year-olds and the one-year-olds.
And they kept on using the existing cure that they had on the two-year-olds and up.
And this went on for quite some time. People were happy.
They had their two cures. Until a particular mother, whose child had just turned two, died of this disease.
And she thought to herself, "My child just turned two, and until the child turned two, I had always used this complicated, expensive cure, you know, this treatment.
And then the child turned two, and I started using the cheap and easy treatment, and I wonder" -- and she wondered, like all parents who lose children wonder -- "if there isn't something that I could have done, like keep on using that complicated, expensive cure."
And she told all the other people, and she said, "How could it possibly be that something that's cheap and simple works as well as something that's complicated and expensive?"
And the people thought, "You know, you're right.
It probably is the wrong thing to do to switch and use the cheap and simple solution."
And the government, they heard her story and the other people, and they said, "Yeah, you're right, we should make a law.
We should outlaw this cheap and simple treatment and not let anybody use this on their children."
And the people were happy. They were satisfied.
For many years this went along, and everything was fine.
But then along came a lowly economist, who had children himself, and he used the expensive and complicated treatment.
But he knew about the cheap and simple one.
And he thought about it, and the expensive one didn't seem that great to him. So he thought, "I don't know anything about science, but I do know something about data, so maybe I should go and look at the data and see whether this expensive and complicated treatment actually works any better than the cheap and simple one."
And lo and behold, when he went through the data, he found that it didn't look like the expensive, complicated solution was any better than the cheap one, at least for the children who were two and older -- the cheap one still didn't work on the kids who were younger.
And so, he went forth to the people and he said, "I've made this wonderful finding: it looks as if we could just use the cheap and simple solution, and by doing so we could save ourselves 300 million dollars a year, and we could spend that on our children in other ways."
And the parents were very unhappy, and they said, "This is a terrible thing, because how can the cheap and easy thing be as good as the hard thing?" And the government was very upset.
And in particular, the people who made this expensive solution were very upset because they thought, "How can we hope to compete with something that's essentially free?
We would lose all of our market."
And people were very angry, and they called him horrible names.
And he decided that maybe he should leave the country for a few days, and seek out some more intelligent, open-minded people in a place called Oxford, and come and try and tell the story at that place.
And so, anyway, here I am. It's not a fairy tale.
It's a true story about the United States today, and the disease I'm referring to is actually motor vehicle accidents for children.
And the free cure is adult seatbelts, and the expensive cure -- the 300-million-dollar-a-year cure -- is child car seats.
And what I'd like to talk to you about today is some of the evidence why I believe this to be true: that for children two years old and up, there really is no real benefit -- proven benefit -- of car seats, in spite of the incredible energy that has been devoted toward expanding the laws and making it socially unacceptable to put your children into seatbelts. And then talk about why --
what is it that makes that true?
And then, finally talk a little bit about a third way, about another technology, which is probably better than anything we have, but which -- there hasn't been any enthusiasm for adoption precisely because people are so enamored with the current car seat solution. OK.
So, many times when you try to do research on data, it records complicated stories -- it's hard to find in the data.
It doesn't turn out to be the case when you look at seatbelts versus car seats.
So the United States keeps a data set of every fatal accident that's happened since 1975.
So in every car crash in which at least one person dies, they have information on all of the people.
So if you look at that data -- it's right up on the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration's website -- you can just look at the raw data, and begin to get a sense of the limited amount of evidence that's in favor of car seats for children aged two and up.
So, here is the data. Here I have, among two- to six-year-olds -- anyone above six, basically no one uses car seats, so you can't compare -- 29.3 percent of the children who are unrestrained in a crash in which at least one person dies, themselves die.
If you put a child in a car seat, 18.2 percent of the children die.
If they're wearing a lap-and-shoulder belt, in this raw data, 19.4 percent die. And interestingly, wearing a lap-only seatbelt, 16.7 percent die. And actually, the theory tells you that the lap-only seatbelt's got to be worse than the lap-and-shoulder belt. And that just reminds you that when you deal with raw data, there are hundreds of confounding variables that may be getting in the way.
So what we do in the study is -- and this is just presenting the same information, but turned into a figure to make it easier.
So the yellow bar represents car seats, the orange bar lap-and-shoulder, and the red bar lap-only seatbelts.
And this is all relative to unrestrained -- the bigger the bar, the better. Okay.
So, this is the data I just showed, OK?
So the highest bar is what you're striving to beat.
So you can control for the basic things, like how hard the crash was, what seat the child was sitting in, etc., the age of the child.
And that's that middle set of bars.
And so, you can see that the lap-only seatbelts start to look worse once you do that.
And then finally, the last set of bars, which are really controlling for everything you could possibly imagine about the crash, 50, 75, 100 different characteristics of the crash.
And what you find is that the car seats and the lap-and-shoulder belts, when it comes to saving lives, fatalities look exactly identical.
And the standard error bands are relatively small around these estimates as well.
And it's not just overall. It's very robust to anything you want to look at.
One thing that's interesting: if you look at frontal-impact crashes -- when the car crashes, the front hits into something -- indeed, what you see is that the car seats look a little bit better.
And I think this isn't just chance.
In order to have the car seat approved, you need to pass certain federal standards, all of which involve slamming your car into a direct frontal crash.
But when you look at other types of crashes, like rear-impact crashes, indeed, the car seats don't perform as well.
And I think that's because they've been optimized to pass, as we always expect people to do, to optimize relative to bright-line rules about how affected the car will be.
And the other thing you might argue is, "Well, car seats have got a lot better over time.
And so if we look at recent crashes -- the whole data set is almost 30 years' worth of data -- you won't see it in the recent crashes. The new car seats are far, far better."
But indeed, in recent crashes the lap-and-shoulder seatbelts, actually, are doing even better than the car seats.
They say, "Well, that's impossible, that can't be."
And the line of argument, if you ask parents, is, "But car seats are so expensive and complicated, and they have this big tangle of latches, how could they possibly not work better than seatbelts because they are so expensive and complicated?"
It's kind of an interesting logic, I think, that people use. And the other logic, they say, "Well, the government wouldn't have told us [to] use them if they weren't much better."
But what's interesting is the government telling us to use them is not actually based on very much.
It really is based on some impassioned pleas of parents whose children died after they turned two, which has led to the passage of all these laws -- not very much on data.
So you can only get so far, I think, in telling your story by using these abstract statistics.
And so I had some friends over to dinner, and I was asking -- we had a cookout -- I was asking them what advice they might have for me about proving my point. They said, "Why don't you run some crash tests?"
And I said, "That's a great idea."
So we actually tried to commission some crash tests.
And it turns out that as we called around to the independent crash test companies around the country, none of them wanted to do our crash test because they said, some explicitly, some not so explicitly, "All of our business comes from car seat manufacturers.
We can't risk alienating them by testing seatbelts relative to car seats."
Now, eventually, one did. Under the conditions of anonymity, they said they would be happy to do this test for us -- so anonymity, and 1,500 dollars per seat that we crashed.
And so, we went to Buffalo, New York, and here is the precursor to it.
These are the crash test dummies, waiting for their chance to take the center stage.
And then, here's how the crash test works.
Here, they don't actually crash the entire car, you know -- it's not worth ruining a whole car to do it.
So they just have these bench seats, and they strap the car seat and the seatbelt onto it.
So I just wanted you to look at this.
And I think this gives you a good idea of why parents think car seats are so great. Look at the kid in the car seat.
Does he not look content, ready to go, like he could survive anything? And then, if you look at the kid in back, it looks like he's already choking before the crash even happens.
It's hard to believe, when you look at this, that that kid in back is going to do very well when you get in a crash.
So this is going to be a crash where they're going to slam this thing forward into a wall at 30 miles an hour, and see what happens. OK?
So, let me show you what happens.
These are three-year-old dummies, by the way.
So here -- this is the car seat. Now watch two things: watch how the head goes forward, and basically hits the knees -- and this is in the car seat -- and watch how the car seat flies around, in the rebound, up in the air.
The car seat's moving all over the place.
Bear in mind there are two things about this.
This is a car seat that was installed by someone who has installed 1,000 car seats, who knew exactly how to do it.
And also it turned out these bench seats are the very best way to install car seats.
Having a flat back makes it much easier to install them.
And so this is a test that's very much rigged in favor of the car seat, OK? So, that kid in this crash fared very well.
The federal standards are that you have to score below a 1,000 to be an approved car seat on this crash, in some metric of units which are not important.
And this crash would have been about a 450.
So this car seat was actually an above-average car seat from Consumer Reports, and did quite well.
So the next one. Now, this is the kid, same crash, who is in the seatbelt. He hardly moves at all, actually, relative to the other child. The funny thing is, the cam work is terrible because they've only set it up to do the car seats, and so, they actually don't even have a way to move the camera so you can see the kid that's on the rebound.
Anyway, it turns out that those two crashes, that actually the three-year-old did slightly worse. So, he gets about a 500 out of -- you know, on this range -- relative to a 400 and something.
But still, if you just took that data from that crash to the federal government, and said, "I have invented a new car seat.
I would like you to approve it for selling," then they would say, "This is a fantastic new car seat, it works great.
It only got a 500, it could have gotten as high up as a 1,000."
And this seatbelt would have passed with flying colors into being approved as a car seat.
So, in some sense, what this is suggesting is that it's not just that people are setting up their car seats wrong, which is putting children at risk. It's just that, fundamentally, the car seats aren't doing much.
So here's the crash. So these are timed at the same time, so you can see that it takes much longer with the car seat -- at rebound, it takes a lot longer -- but there's just a lot less movement for child who's in the seatbelt.
So, I'll show you the six-year-old crashes as well.
The six-year-old is in a car seat, and it turns out that looks terrible, but that's great. That's like a 400, OK?
So that kid would do fine in the crash.
Nothing about that would have been problematic to the child at all.
And then here's the six-year-old in the seatbelt, and in fact, they get exactly within, you know, within one or two points of the same. So really, for the six-year-old, the car seat did absolutely nothing whatsoever.
That's some more evidence, so in some sense -- I was criticized by a scientist, who said, "You could never publish a study with an n of 4," meaning those four crashes.
So I wrote him back and I said, "What about an n of 45,004?"
Because I had the other 45,000 other real-world crashes.
And I just think that it's interesting that the idea of using real-world crashes, which is very much something that economists think would be the right thing to do, is something that scientists don't actually, usually think -- they would rather use a laboratory, a very imperfect science of looking at the dummies, than actually 30 years of data of what we've seen with children and with car seats.
And so I think the answer to this puzzle is that there's a much better solution out there, that's gotten nobody excited because everyone is so delighted with the way car seats are presumably working.
And if you think from a design perspective, about going back to square one, and say, "I just want to protect kids in the back seat."
I don't there's anyone in this room who'd say, "Well, the right way to start would be, let's make a great seat belt for adults.
And then, let's make this really big contraption that you have to rig up to it in this daisy chain."
I mean, why not start -- who's sitting in the back seat anyway except for kids?
But essentially, do something like this, which I don't know exactly how much it would cost to do, but there's no reason I could see why this should be much more expensive than a regular car seat.
It's just actually -- you see, this is folding up -- it's behind the seat.
You've got a regular seat for adults, and then you fold it down, and the kid sits on top, and it's integrated.
It seems to me that this can't be a very expensive solution, and it's got to work better than what we already have.
So the question is, is there any hope for adoption of something like this, which would presumably save a lot of lives?
And I think the answer, perhaps, lies in a story.
The answer both to why has a car seat been so successful, and why this may someday be adopted or not, lies in a story that my dad told me, relating to when he was a doctor in the U.S. Air Force in England. And this is a long time ago: you were allowed to do things then you can't do today.
So, my father would have patients come in who he thought were not really sick.
And he had a big jar full of placebo pills that he would give them, and he'd say, "Come back in a week, if you still feel lousy."
OK, and most of them would not come back, but some of them would come back.
And when they came back, he, still convinced they were not sick, had another jar of pills. In this jar were huge horse pills.
They were almost impossible to swallow.
And these, to me, are the analogy for the car seats.
People would look at these and say, "Man, this thing is so big and so hard to swallow. If this doesn't make me feel better, you know, what possibly could?"
And it turned out that most people wouldn't come back, because it worked. But every once in a while, there was still a patient convinced that he was sick, and he'd come back. And my dad had a third jar of pills.
And the jar of pills he had, he said, were the tiniest little pills he could find, so small you could barely see them.
And he would say, listen, I know I gave you that huge pill, that complicated, hard-to-swallow pill before, but now I've got one that's so potent, that is really tiny and small and almost invisible.
It's almost like this thing here, which you can't even see."
And it turned out that never, in all the times my dad gave out this pill, the really tiny pill, did anyone ever come back still complaining of sickness.
So, my dad always took that as evidence that this little, teeny, powerful pill had the ultimate placebo effect. And in some sense, if that's the right story, I think integrated car seats you will see, very quickly, becoming something that everyone has. The other possible conclusion is, well, maybe after coming to my father three times, getting sent home with placebos, he still felt sick, he went and found another doctor.
And that's completely possible. And if that's the case, then I think we're stuck with conventional car seats for a long time to come.
Thank you very much.
(Audience: I just wanted to ask you, when we wear seatbelts we don't necessarily wear them just to prevent loss of life, it's also to prevent lots of serious injury.
Your data looks at fatalities. It doesn't look at serious injury.
Is there any data to show that child seats are actually less effective, or just as effective as seatbelts for serious injury? Because that would prove your case.) Steven Levitt: Yeah, that's a great question. In my data, and in another data set I've looked at for New Jersey crashes, I find very small differences in injury.
So in this data, it's statistically insignificant differences in injury between car seats and lap-and-shoulder belts.
In the New Jersey data, which is different, because it's not just fatal crashes, but all crashes in New Jersey that are reported, it turns out that there is a 10 percent difference in injuries, but generally they're the minor injuries.
Now, what's interesting, I should say this as a disclaimer, there is medical literature that is very difficult to resolve with this other data, which suggests that car seats are dramatically better.
And they use a completely different methodology that involves -- after the crash occurs, they get from the insurance companies the names of the people who were in the crash, and they call them on the phone, and they asked them what happened.
And I really can't resolve, yet, and I'd like to work with these medical researchers to try to understand how there can be these differences, which are completely at odds with one another.
But it's obviously a critical question.
The question is even if -- are there enough serious injuries to make these cost-effective? It's kind of tricky.
Even if they're right, it's not so clear that they're so cost-effective.
I don't know your name. Audience Member: Howard. Howard.
Thom Mayne: Howard? I'm sitting next to Howard. I don't know Howard, obviously, and he's going, I hope you're not next.
Amazing. Amazing performance.
I kind of erased everything in my brain to follow that.
Let me start some place. I'm interested -- I kind of do the same thing, but I don't move my body.  And instead of using human figures to develop ideas of time and space, I work in the mineral world. I work with more or less inert matter.
And I organize it. And, well, it's also a bit different because an architect versus, let's say, a dance company finally is a negotiation between one's private world, one's conceptual world, the world of ideas, the world of aspirations, of inventions, with the relationship of the exterior world and all the limitations, the naysayers.
Because I have to say, for my whole career, if there's anything that's been consistent, it's been that you can't do it.
No matter what I've done, what I've tried to do, everybody says it can't be done.
And it's continuous across the complete spectrum of the various kind of realities that you confront with your ideas.
And to be an architect, somehow you have to negotiate between left and right, and you have to negotiate between this very private place where ideas take place and the outside world, and then make it understood.
I can start any number of places, because this process is also -- I think -- very different from some of the morning sessions, which you had such a kind of very clear, such a lineal idea, like the last one, say, with Howard, that I think the creative process in architecture, the design process, is extremely circuitous. It's labyrinthine.
It's Calvino's idea of the quickest way between two points is the circuitous line, not the straight line.
And definitely my life has been part of that.
I'm going to start with some simple kind of notions of how we organize things.
But basically, what we do is, we try to give coherence to the world.
We make physical things, buildings that become a part in an accretional process; they make cities.
And those things are the reflection of the processes, and the time that they are made.
And what I'm doing is attempting to synthesize the way one sees the world and the territories which are useful as generative material.
Because, really, all I'm interested in, always, as an architect, is the way things are produced because that's what I do. Right?
And it's not based on an a priori notion.
I have no interest at all in conceiving something in my brain and saying, "This is what it looks like." In fact, somebody mentioned -- Ewan, maybe it was you in your introduction -- about this is what architects -- did somebody say it's what business people come to, it's what the corporate world comes to when they want to make it look like something at the end of the line? Huh. Wow.
It doesn't work that way for me at all.
I have no interest in that whatsoever.
Architecture is the beginning of something, because it's -- if you're not involved in first principles, if you're not involved in the absolute, the beginning of that generative process, it's cake decoration.
And I've nothing wrong with cake decoration and cake decorators, if anybody's involved in cake decorations -- it's not what I'm interested in doing.  And so, in the formation of things, in giving it form, in concretizing these things, it starts with some notion of how one organizes.
And I've had for 30 years an interest in a series of complexities where a series of forces are brought to bear, and to understand the nature of the final result of that, representing the building itself.
There's been a continual relationship between inventions, which are private, and reality, which has been important to me.
A project which is part of an exhibition in Copenhagen 10 years ago, which was the modeling of a hippocampus -- the territory of the brain that records short-term memory -- and the documentation of that, the imaginative and documentation of that through a series of drawings which literally attempt to organize that experience.
And it had to do with the notion of walking a kilometer, observing every kilometer a particular object of desire, and then placing that within this.
And the notion was that I could make an organization not built on normal coherencies, but built on non-sequiturs, built on randomness.
And I'd been extremely interested in this notion of randomness as it produces architectural work and as it definitely connects to the notion of the city, an accretional notion of the city, and that led to various ideas of organization.
And then this led to broader ideas of buildings that come together through the multiplicity of systems.
And it's not any single system that makes the work.
It's the relationship -- it's the dynamics between the systems -- which have the power to transform and invent and produce an architecture that is -- that would otherwise not exist.
And those systems could be identified, and they could be grouped together.
And of course, today, with the technology of the computer and with the rapid prototyping, etc., we have the mechanisms to understand and to respond to these systems, and to allow them to adjust to the various accommodations of functionalities because that's all we do.
We're producing spaces that accommodate human activity.
And what I'm interested in is not the styling of that, but the relationship of that as it enhances that activity.
And that directly connects to ideas of city-making.
This is a project that we just finished in Penang for a very, very large city project that came directly out of this process, which is the result of the multiplicity of forces that produce it.
And the project -- again, enormous, enormous competition -- on the Hudson River and in New York that we were asked to do three years ago, which uses these processes.
And what you're looking at are possibilities that have to do with the generation of the city as one applies a methodology that uses notions of these multiple forces, that deals with the enormity of the problem, the complexity of the problem, when we're designing cities at larger and larger aggregates.
Because one of the issues today is that the economic aggregate is driving the development aggregate, and as the aggregates get larger we require more and more complex investigation processes to solve these problems.
And that led us directly to the Olympic Village.
I was in New York on Monday presenting it to the IOC.
We won the competition -- what was it, nine months ago?
Again, a direct reflection from using these processes to develop extremely complicated, very large-scale organisms.
And then, also, was working with broad strategies.
In this case, we only used 15 of the 60 acres of land, and the 45 acres was a park and would become the legacy of the Olympic Village.
And it would become the second largest park in the boroughs, etc.
Its position, of course, in the middle of Manhattan -- it's on Hunter's Point.
And then the broader ideas of city-making start having direct influences on architecture, on the elements that make up the broader scheme, the buildings themselves, and start guiding us.
Architecture for me has been an investigation of a multiplicity of forces that could come from literally any place.
And so I can start this discussion in any number of places, and I've chosen three or four to talk about.
And it has also to do with an interest in the vast kind of territory that architecture touches.
It literally is connected to anything in terms of knowledge base.
There's just no place that it doesn't somehow have a connective tissue to.
This is Jim Dine, and it's the absence of presence, etc.
It's the clothing, the skin, without the presence of the character.
It became kind of an idea for the notion of the surface of a work, and it was used in a project where we could unravel that surface, and it was a figurative idea that was going to be folded and made into a very, kind of complex space.
And the idea was the relationship of the space, which was made up of the fold of the image, and the dialectic or the conflict between the figuration, and the clarity of the image and the complexity of the space, which were in dialog.
And it made us rethink the whole notion of how we work and how we make things, and it led us to ideas that were closer to fashion design as we flattened out surfaces, and then brought them back together as they could make spatial combinations.
And this was the first prototype in Korea, as we're dealing with a dynamic envelope, and then the same characteristic of the fabric.
It has a material identity and it's translucent and it's porous, and it allows us for a very different notion of what a skin of a building is.
And that turned right away into another project.
This is the Caltrans building in Los Angeles.
And now we're seeing as the skin and the body is differentiated.
Again, it's a very, very simple notion.
If you look at most buildings, what you look at is the building, the facade, and it is the building.
And all of a sudden we're kind of moving away, and we're separating the skin from the body, and that's going to lead to broader performance criteria, which I'm going to talk about in a minute.
And you're looking at how it drapes over and differentiates from the body.
And then, again, the building itself, middle of Los Angeles, right across from City Hall.
And as it moves, it takes pieces of the earth with it. It bends up.
It's part of a sign system, which was part of the kind of legacy of Los Angeles -- the two-dimension, three-dimension signing, etc.
And then it allows one to penetrate the work itself.
It's transparent, and it allows you to understand, I think, what is always the most interesting thing in any building, which is the actual constructional processes that make it.
And it's probably the most intense kind of territory of the work, which is not occupied, because architecture is always the most interesting in some mechanism when it's separated from function, and this is an area that allows for that.
And then the skin starts transforming into other materials.
We're using light as a building material in this case.
We're working with Keith Sonnier in New York, and we're making this large outside room, which is possible in Los Angeles, and which is very much reflective of the urban, the contemporary urban environments that you would find in Shibuya or you'd find in Mexico City or Sao Paulo, etc., that have to do with activating the city over a longer span of time.
And that was very much part of the notion of the urban objective of this project in Los Angeles.
And, again, all of it promoting transparency.
And an image which may be closest talks about the use of light as a medium, that light becomes literally a building material.
Well, that immediately turned into something much broader, and as a scope.
And again, we're looking at an early sketch where I'm understanding now that the skin can be a transition between the ground and the tower.
This is a building in San Francisco which is under construction.
And now it turned into something much, much broader as a problem, and it has to do with performance.
This will be the first building in the United States that took -- well, I can't say it took the air conditioning out. It's a hybrid.
I wanted a pure thing, and I can't get it.
It's a wrong attitude, actually, because the hybrid is probably more interesting.
But we took the air conditioning out of the tower.
There's some air conditioning left in the base, but the skin now moves on hydraulics.
It forces air through a Venturi force if there's no wind.
It adjusts continually. And we removed the air conditioning.
Huge, huge thing. Half a million dollars a year delta.
10 of these -- it's just under a million square feet -- 800 and some thousand square feet -- 10 of these would power Sausalito -- the delta on this.
And so now what we're looking at, as the projects get larger in scale, as they interface with broader problems, that they expand the capabilities in terms of their performance.
Well, I could also start here.
We could talk about the relationship at a more biological sense of the relationship of building and ground.
Well, our research -- my generation for sure, people who were going to school in the late '60s -- made very much a shift out of the internal focus of architecture, looking at architecture within its own territory, and we were much more affected by film, by what was going on in the art world, etc.
This is, of course, Michael Heizer.
And when I saw this, first an image and then visited, it completely changed the way I thought after that point.
And I understood that building really could be the augmentation of the Earth's surface, and it completely shifted the notion of building ground in the most basic sense.
And then -- well, he was probably looking at this -- this is Nazca; this is 700 years ago -- the most amazing four-kilometer land sculptures.
They're just totally incredible.
And that led us to then completely rethinking how we draw, how we work.
This is the first sketch of a high school in Pomona -- well, whatever it is, a model, a conceptual, kind of idea.
And it's the reshaping of the Earth to make it occupiable.
So it puts 200,000 square feet of stuff that make a high school work in the surface of that Earth.
There it is modeled as it was developing into a piece of work.
And there it is, again, as it's starting to get resolved tectonically, and then there's the school.
And, of course, we're interested in participating with education.
I have absolutely no interest in producing a building that just accommodates X, Y and Z function.
What I'm interested in are how these ideas participate in the educational process of young people.
It demands some sort of notion of inquiry because it's a system that's developed not sculpturally.
It's an idea that started from my first discussion.
It has to do with a broad, consistent logic, and that logic could be understood as one occupies the building.
And there's an overt -- at least, there's an attempt to make a very overt notion of a building that connects to the land in a very different way because I was interested in a very didactic approach to the problem, as one would understand that.
And the second project that was just finished in Los Angeles that uses some of the same ideas. It uses landscape as a major idea.
Then, again, we're doing the headquarters for NOAA -- National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Agency -- outside of Washington in Maryland.
And this is how they see the world.
They have 22 satellites zipping around at plus or minus 100 miles, and the site's in red.
And what we really want to do -- well, the architects, if there are architects out there, this is the Laugier Hut; this is the primitive hut that's been around for so long -- and what we wanted to do is really build this, because they see themselves as the caretakers of the world, and we wanted them to look down at their satellite, how they see their own site, that eight-acre site,
and we wanted nothing left. We wanted it to stay green.
There's actually three baseball fields on it right now, and they're going to stay there.
We put one piece directly north-south, and it holds the dishes at the ears, right?
And then right below that the processing, and the mission lift, and the mission control room, and all the other spaces are underground.
And what you look at is an aircraft carrier that's performance-driven by the cone vision of these satellite dishes.
And that the building itself is occupied in the lower portion, broken up by a series of courts, and it's five acres of uninterrupted, horizontal space for their administrative offices.
And then that, in turn, propelled us to look at larger-scale projects where this notion of landscape building interface becomes a connective tissue.
The new capital competition for Berlin, four years ago.
And again we just finished the ECB -- actually Coop Himmelblau in Vienna just won this project, where the building was separated into a series of landscape elements that became part of a connective tissue of a park, which is parallel to the river, and develops ideas of the buildings themselves and becomes part of the connective fabric -- the social, cultural and the landscape, recreational fabric of the city.
And the building is no longer seen as an autonomous thing, but something that's only inextricably connected to this city and this place at this time.
And a project that was realized in Austria, the Hooper Bank, which again used this idea of connecting typology, the traditional buildings, and morphology, or the relationship of the development of land as an idea, into a complex, which is a piece of a city where we can see part of it is literally just this augmenting, this movement of the land that's a very simple idea of just lifting it up and occupying it,
and other parts are much more energetic and intense.
And talk about that intensity in terms of the collisions of the kind of events they make that have to do with putting a series of systems together, and then where part of it is in the ground, part of it is oppositional lifts.
One enters the building as it lifts off the ground, and it becomes part of the idea.
And then the skin -- the edges of this -- all promote the dynamic, the movement of the building as a series of seismic shifts, geologic shifts. Right?
And it makes for event space and then it breaks in places that allow you to peer into the interior, and those interiors, again, are promoting transparency for the workplace, which has been a continual interest of ours.
And then, again, in a more, kind of traditional setting, this is a graduate student housing in Toronto, and it's very much about the relationship of a building as it makes a connective tissue to the city.
The main idea was the gateway, where it breaks the site, and the building occupies both the public space and the private space.
And it's that territory of -- it's this thing.
I visited the site many times, and everybody, kind of -- you can see this from two kilometers away; it's an exact center of the street, and the whole notion is to engage the public, to engage buildings as part of the public tissue of the city.
And finally, one of the most interesting projects -- it's a courthouse.
And what I want to talk about -- this is the Supreme Court, of course -- and, well, I'm dealing with Michael Hogan, the Chief Justice of Oregon.
You could not proceed without making this negotiation between one's own values and the relationship of the character you're working with and how he understands the court, because I'm showing him, of course, Corbusier at Savoy, which is 1928, which is the beginning of modern architecture.
Well, then we get to this image.
And this is where the project started. Because I'm going, I'm interested in the phenomenon that's taking place in here.
And really what we're talking about is constructing reality.
And I'm a character that's extremely interested in understanding the nature of that constructed reality because there's no such thing as nature any more. Nature is gone.
Nature in the 19th-century sense, alright?
Nature is only a cultural edifice today, right?
We construct it and we construct those ideas.
And then of course, this one, our governor at the moment.
And we spent some time with Conan, believe it or not, and then that led us to, kind of, the very differences of our worlds from a legal and an artistic, architectural.
And it forced us to talk about notions of how we work, and the dynamics of that, and what other sources of the work is.
And it led us to the project, the courthouse, which is absolutely a part of a negotiation between tradition and pieces of the traditional courthouse.
You'll find a stair that's the same length as the Supreme Court.
Here's a piano nobile, which is a device used in the Renaissance.
The courts were made of that. The skin is this series of layers that reflect even rusticated stonework, but which were embedded with fragments of the Constitution, which were part of the little process, all set on a plinth that defined it from the community.
Thank you so much.
I was asked to come here and speak about creation.
And I only have 15 minutes, and I see they're counting already.
And I can -- in 15 minutes, I think I can touch only a very rather janitorial branch of creation, which I call "creativity."
Creativity is how we cope with creation.
While creation sometimes seems a bit un-graspable, or even pointless, creativity is always meaningful.
See, for instance, in this picture.
You know, creation is what put that dog in that picture, and creativity is what makes us see a chicken on his hindquarters.
When you think about -- you know, creativity has a lot to do with causality too.
You know, when I was a teenager, I was a creator.
I just did things.
Then I became an adult and started knowing who I was, and tried to maintain that persona -- I became creative.
It wasn't until I actually did a book and a retrospective exhibition, that I could track exactly -- looks like all the craziest things that I had done, all my drinking, all my parties -- they followed a straight line that brings me to the point that actually I'm talking to you at this moment.
Though it's actually true, you know, the reason I'm talking to you right now is because I was born in Brazil.
If I was born in Monterey, probably would be in Brazil.
You know, I was born in Brazil and grew up in the '70s under a climate of political distress, and I was forced to learn to communicate in a very specific way -- in a sort of a semiotic black market.
You couldn't really say what you wanted to say; you had to invent ways of doing it.
You didn't trust information very much.
That led me to another step of why I'm here today, is because I really liked media of all kinds.
I was a media junkie, and eventually got involved with advertising.
My first job in Brazil was actually to develop a way to improve the readability of billboards, and based on speed, angle of approach and actually blocks of text.
It was very -- actually, it was a very good study, and got me a job in an ad agency.
And they also decided that I had to -- to give me a very ugly Plexiglas trophy for it.
And another point -- why I'm here -- is that the day I went to pick up the Plexiglas trophy, I rented a tuxedo for the first time in my life, picked the thing -- didn't have any friends.
On my way out, I had to break a fight apart.
Somebody was hitting somebody else with brass knuckles.
They were in tuxedos, and fighting. It was very ugly.
And also -- advertising people do that all the time --  -- and I -- well, what happened is when I went back, it was on the way back to my car, the guy who got hit decided to grab a gun -- I don't know why he had a gun -- and shoot the first person he decided to be his aggressor.
The first person was wearing a black tie, a tuxedo. It was me.
Luckily, it wasn't fatal, as you can all see.
And, even more luckily, the guy said that he was sorry and I bribed him for compensation money, otherwise I press charges.
And that's how -- with this money I paid for a ticket to come to the United States in 1983, and that's very -- the basic reason I'm talking to you here today: because I got shot.   Well, when I started working with my own work, I decided that I shouldn't do images.
You know, I became -- I took this very iconoclastic approach.
Because when I decided to go into advertising, I wanted to do -- I wanted to airbrush naked people on ice, for whiskey commercials, that's what I really wanted to do.  But I -- they didn't let me do it, so I just -- you know, they would only let me do other things.
But I wasn't into selling whiskey; I was into selling ice.
The first works were actually objects.
It was kind of a mixture of found object, product design and advertising.
And I called them relics.
They were displayed first at Stux Gallery in 1983.
This is the clown skull.
Is a remnant of a race of -- a very evolved race of entertainers.
They lived in Brazil, long time ago.  This is the Ashanti joystick.
Unfortunately, it has become obsolete because it was designed for Atari platform.
A Playstation II is in the works, maybe for the next TED I'll bring it.
The rocking podium.  This is the pre-Columbian coffeemaker.  Actually, the idea came out of an argument that I had at Starbucks, that I insisted that I wasn't having Colombian coffee; the coffee was actually pre-Columbian.
The Bonsai table.
The entire Encyclopedia Britannica bound in a single volume, for travel purposes.
And the half tombstone, for people who are not dead yet.
I wanted to take that into the realm of images, and I decided to make things that had the same identity conflicts.
So I decided to do work with clouds.
Because clouds can mean anything you want.
But now I wanted to work in a very low-tech way, so something that would mean at the same time a lump of cotton, a cloud and Durer's praying hands -- although this looks a lot more like Mickey Mouse's praying hands.
But I was still, you know -- this is a kitty cloud.
They're called "Equivalents," after Alfred Stieglitz's work.
"The Snail."
But I was still working with sculpture, and I was really trying to go flatter and flatter.
"The Teapot."
I had a chance to go to Florence, in -- I think it was '94, and I saw Ghiberti's "Door of Paradise."
And he did something that was very tricky.
He put together two different media from different periods of time.
First, he got an age-old way of making it, which was relief, and he worked this with three-point perspective, which was brand-new technology at the time.
And it's totally overkill.
And your eye doesn't know which level to read.
And you become trapped into this kind of representation.
So I decided to make these very simple renderings, that at first they are taken as a line drawing -- you know, something that's very -- and then I did it with wire.
The idea was to -- because everybody overlooks white -- like pencil drawings, you know?
And they would look at it -- "Ah, it's a pencil drawing."
Then you have this double take and see that it's actually something that existed in time.
It had a physicality, and you start going deeper and deeper into sort of narrative that goes this way, towards the image. So this is "Monkey with Leica."
"Relaxation."
"Fiat Lux."
And the same way the history of representation evolved from line drawings to shaded drawings.
And I wanted to deal with other subjects.
I started taking that into the realm of landscape, which is something that's almost a picture of nothing.
I made these pictures called "Pictures of Thread," and I named them after the amount of yards that I used to represent each picture.
These always end up being a photograph at the end, or more like an etching in this case.
So this is a lighthouse.
This is "6,500 Yards," after Corot. "9,000 Yards," after Gerhard Richter.
And I don't know how many yards, after John Constable.
Departing from the lines, I decided to tackle the idea of points, like which is more similar to the type of representation that we find in photographs themselves.
I had met a group of children in the Caribbean island of Saint Kitts, and I did work and play with them.
I got some photographs from them.
Upon my arrival in New York, I decided -- they were children of sugar plantation workers.
And by manipulating sugar over a black paper, I made portraits of them.
These are --  -- Thank you. This is "Valentina, the Fastest."
It was just the name of the child, with the little thing you get to know of somebody that you meet very briefly.
"Valicia."
"Jacynthe."
But another layer of representation was still introduced.
Because I was doing this while I was making these pictures, I realized that I could add still another thing I was trying to make a subject -- something that would interfere with the themes, so chocolate is very good, because it has -- it brings to mind ideas that go from scatology to romance.
And so I decided to make these pictures, and they were very large, so you had to walk away from it to be able to see them.
So they're called "Pictures of Chocolate."
Freud probably could explain chocolate better than I. He was the first subject.
And Jackson Pollock also.
Pictures of crowds are particularly interesting, because, you know, you go to that -- you try to figure out the threshold with something you can define very easily, like a face, goes into becoming just a texture.
"Paparazzi."
I used the dust at the Whitney Museum to render some pieces of their collection.
And I picked minimalist pieces because they're about specificity.
And you render this with the most non-specific material, which is dust itself.
Like, you know, you have the skin particles of every single museum visitor.
They do a DNA scan of this, they will come up with a great mailing list.
This is Richard Serra.
I bought a computer, and [they] told me it had millions of colors in it.
You know an artist's first response to this is, who counted it? You know?
And I realized that I never worked with color, because I had a hard time controlling the idea of single colors.
But once they're applied to numeric structure, then you can feel more comfortable.
So the first time I worked with colors was by making these mosaics of Pantone swatches.
They end up being very large pictures, and I photographed with a very large camera -- an 8x10 camera.
So you can see the surface of every single swatch -- like in this picture of Chuck Close.
And you have to walk very far to be able to see it.
Also, the reference to Gerhard Richter's use of color charts -- and the idea also entering another realm of representation that's very common to us today, which is the bit map.
I ended up narrowing the subject to Monet's "Haystacks."
This is something I used to do as a joke -- you know, make -- the same like -- Robert Smithson's "Spiral Jetty" -- and then leaving traces, as if it was done on a tabletop.
I tried to prove that he didn't do that thing in the Salt Lake.
But then, just doing the models, I was trying to explore the relationship between the model and the original.
And I felt that I would have to actually go there and make some earthworks myself.
I opt for very simple line drawings -- kind of stupid looking.
And at the same time, I was doing these very large constructions, being 150 meters away.
Now I would do very small ones, which would be like -- but under the same light, and I would show them together, so the viewer would have to really figure it out what one he was looking.
I wasn't interested in the very large things, or in the small things.
I was more interested in the things in between, you know, because you can leave an enormous range for ambiguity there.
This is like you see -- the size of a person over there.
This is a pipe.
A hanger.
And this is another thing that I did -- you know working -- everybody loves to watch somebody draw, but not many people have a chance to watch somebody draw in -- a lot of people at the same time, to evidence a single drawing.
And I love this work, because I did these cartoonish clouds over Manhattan for a period of two months.
And it was quite wonderful, because I had an interest -- an early interest -- in theater, that's justified on this thing.
In theater, you have the character and the actor in the same place, trying to negotiate each other in front of an audience.
And in this, you'd have like a -- something that looks like a cloud, and it is a cloud at the same time.
So they're like perfect actors.
My interest in acting, especially bad acting, goes a long way.
Actually, I once paid like 60 dollars to see a very great actor to do a version of "King Lear," and I felt really robbed, because by the time the actor started being King Lear, he stopped being the great actor that I had paid money to see.
On the other hand, you know, I paid like three dollars, I think -- and I went to a warehouse in Queens to see a version of "Othello" by an amateur group.
And it was quite fascinating, because you know the guy -- his name was Joey Grimaldi -- he impersonated the Moorish general -- you know, for the first three minutes he was really that general, and then he went back into plumber, he worked as a plumber, so -- plumber, general, plumber, general -- so for three dollars, I saw two tragedies for the price of one.
See, I think it's not really about impression, making people fall for a really perfect illusion, as much as it is to make -- I usually work at the lowest threshold of visual illusion.
Because it's not about fooling somebody, it's actually giving somebody a measure of their own belief: how much you want to be fooled.
That's why we pay to go to magic shows and things like that.
Well, I think that's it.
My time is nearly up.
Thank you very much.
I get asked a lot what the difference between my work is and typical Pentagon long-range strategic planners.
And the answer I like to offer is what they typically do is they think about the future of wars in the context of war.
And what I've spent 15 years doing in this business -- and it's taken me almost 14 to figure it out -- is I think about the future of wars in the context of everything else.
So I tend to specialize on the scene between war and peace.
The material I'm going to show you is one idea from a book with a lot of ideas.
It's the one that takes me around the world right now interacting with foreign militaries quite a bit.
The material was generated in two years of work I did for the Secretary of Defense, thinking about a new national grand strategy for the United States.
I'm going to present a problem and try to give you an answer.
Here's my favorite bonehead concept from the 1990s in the Pentagon: the theory of anti-access, area-denial asymmetrical strategies.
Why do we call it that?
Because it's got all those A's lined up I guess.
This is gobbledygook for if the United States fights somebody we're going to be huge.
They're going to be small.
we're going to kick their ass, which is why people don't try to do that any more.
I met the last Air Force General who had actually shot down an enemy plane in combat.
He's now a one star General.
That's how distant we are from even meeting an air force willing to fly against ours.
So that overmatched capability creates problems -- catastrophic successes the White House calls them.
And we're trying to figure that out, because it is an amazing capability.
The question is, what's the good you can do with it?
OK?
The theory of anti-access, area-denial asymmetrical strategies -- gobbledygook that we sell to Congress, because if we just told them we can kick anybody's asses they wouldn't buy us all the stuff we want.
So we say, area-denial, anti-access asymmetrical strategies and their eyes glaze over.
And they say, "Will you build it in my district?"
Here's my parody and it ain't much of one.
Let's talk about a battle space.
I don't know, Taiwan Straits 2025.
Let's talk about an enemy embedded within that battle space.
I don't know, the Million Man Swim.
The United States has to access that battle space instantaneously.
They throw up anti-access, area-denial asymmetrical strategies.
A banana peel on the tarmac.
Trojan horses on our computer networks reveal all our Achilles' heels instantly.
We say, "China, it's yours."
Prometheus approach, largely a geographic definition, focuses almost exclusively on the start of conflict.
We field the first-half team in a league that insists on keeping score until the end of the game.
That's the problem.
We can run the score up against anybody, and then get our asses kicked in the second half -- what they call fourth generation warfare.
Here's the way I like to describe it instead.
There is no battle space the U.S. Military cannot access.
They said we couldn't do Afghanistan. We did it with ease.
They said we couldn't do Iraq.
We did it with 150 combat casualties in six weeks.
We did it so fast we weren't prepared for their collapse.
There is nobody we can't take down.
The question is, what do you do with the power?
So there's no trouble accessing battle spaces.
What we have trouble accessing is the transition space that must naturally follow, and creating the peace space that allows us to move on.
Problem is, the Defense Department over here beats the hell out of you.
The State Department over here says, "Come on boy, I know you can make it."
And that poor country runs off that ledge, does that cartoon thing and then drops.
This is not about overwhelming force, but proportional force.
It's about non-lethal technologies, because if you fire real ammo into a crowd of women and children rioting you're going to lose friends very quickly.
This is not about projecting power, but about staying power, which is about legitimacy with the locals.
Who do you access in this transition space?
You have to create internal partners. You have to access coalition partners.
We asked the Indians for 17,000 peace keepers.
I know their senior leadership, they wanted to give it to us.
But they said to us, "You know what?
In that transition space you're mostly hat not enough cattle.
We don't think you can pull it off, we're not going to give you our 17,000 peace keepers for fodder."
We asked the Russians for 40,000.
They said no.
I was in China in August, I said, "You should have 50,000 peace keepers in Iraq.
It's your oil, not ours."
Which is the truth. It's their oil.
And the Chinese said to me, "Dr. Barnett, you're absolutely right.
In a perfect world we'd have 50,000 there.
But it's not a perfect world, and your administration isn't getting us any closer."
But we have trouble accessing our outcomes.
We lucked out, frankly, on the selection.
We face different opponents across these three.
And it's time to start admitting you can't ask the same 19-year-old to do it all, day in and day out.
It's just too damn hard.
We have an unparalleled capacity to wage war.
We don't do the everything else so well.
Frankly, we do it better than anybody and we still suck at it.
We have a brilliant Secretary of War.
We don't have a Secretary of Everything Else.
Because if we did, that guy would be in front of the Senate, still testifying over Abu Ghraib.
The problem is he doesn't exist.
There is no Secretary of Everything Else.
I think we have an unparalleled capacity to wage war.
I call that the Leviathan Force.
What we need to build is a force for the Everything Else.
I call them the System Administrators.
What I think this really represents is lack of an A to Z rule set for the world as a whole for processing politically bankrupt states.
We have one for processing economically bankrupt states.
It's the IMF Sovereign Bankruptcy Plan, OK?
We argue about it every time we use it.
Argentina just went through it, broke a lot of rules.
They got out on the far end, we said, "Fine, don't worry about it."
It's transparent. A certain amount of certainty gives the sense of a non-zero outcome.
We don't have one for processing politically bankrupt states that, frankly, everybody wants gone.
Like Saddam, like Mugabe, like Kim Jong-Il -- people who kill in hundreds of thousands or millions.
Like the 250,000 dead so far in Sudan.
What would an A to Z system look like?
I'm going to distinguish between what I call front half and back half.
And let's call this red line, I don't know, mission accomplished.
What we have extant right now, at the beginning of this system, is the U.N. Security Council as a grand jury.
What can they do?
They can indict your ass.
They can debate it. They can write it on a piece of paper.
They can put it in an envelope and mail it to you, and then say in no uncertain terms, "Please cut that out."
That gets you about four million dead in Central Africa over the 1990s.
That gets you 250,000 dead in the Sudan in the last 15 months.
Everybody's got to answer their grandchildren some day what you did about the holocaust in Africa, and you better have an answer.
We don't have anything to translate that will into action.
What we do have is the U.S.-enabled Leviathan Force that says, "You want me to take that guy down? I'll take that guy down.
I'll do it on Tuesday. It will cost you 20 billion dollars."
But here's the deal.
As soon as I can't find anybody else to air out, I leave the scene immediately.
That's called the Powell Doctrine.
Way downstream we have the International Criminal Court.
They love to put them on trial. They've got Milosevi right now.
What are we missing?
A functioning executive that will translate will into action, because we don't have it.
Every time we lead one of these efforts we have to whip ourselves into this imminent threat thing.
We haven't faced an imminent threat since the Cuban missile crisis in 1962.
But we use this language from a bygone era to scare ourselves into doing something because we're a democracy and that's what it takes.
And if that doesn't work we scream, "He's got a gun!"
just as we rush in.
And then we look over the body and we find an old cigarette lighter and we say, "Jesus, it was dark."
Do you want to do it, France?
France says, "No, but I do like to criticize you after the fact."
What we need downstream is a great power enabled -- what I call that Sys Admin Force.
We should have had 250,000 troops streaming into Iraq on the heels of that Leviathan sweeping towards Baghdad.
What do you get then?
No looting, no military disappearing, no arms disappearing, no ammo disappearing, no Muqtada Al-Sadr -- I'm wrecking his bones -- no insurgency.
Talk to anybody who was over there in the first six months.
We had six months to feel the lob, to get the job done, and we dicked around for six months.
And then they turned on us.
Why? Because they just got fed up.
They saw what we did to Saddam.
They said, "You're that powerful, you can resurrect this country.
You're America."
What we need is an international reconstruction fund -- Sebastian Mallaby, Washington Post, great idea.
Model on the IMF.
Instead of passing the hat each time, OK?
Where are we going to find this guy? G20, that's easy.
Check out their agenda since 9/11.
All security dominated.
They're going to decide up front how the money gets spent just like in the IMF.
You vote according to how much money you put in the kitty.
Here's my challenge to the Defense Department.
You've got to build this force. You've got to seed this force.
You've got to track coalition partners. Create a record of success.
You will get this model.
You tell me it's too hard to do.
I'll walk this dog right through that six part series on the Balkans.
We did it just like that.
I'm talking about regularizing it, making it transparent.
Would you like Mugabe gone?
Would you like Kim Jong-Il, who's killed about two million people, would you like him gone?
Would you like a better system?
This is why it matters to the military.
They've been experiencing an identity crisis since the end of the Cold War.
I'm not talking about the difference between reality and desire, which I can do because I'm not inside the beltway.
I'm talking about the 1990s.
The Berlin Wall falls. We do Desert Storm.
The split starts to emerge between those in the military who see a future they can live with, and those who see a future that starts to scare them, like the U.S. submarine community, which watches the Soviet Navy disappear overnight.
Ah!
So they start moving from reality towards desire and they create their own special language to describe their voyage of self-discovery and self-actualization.
The problem is you need a big, sexy opponent to fight against.
And if you can't find one you've got to make one up.
China, all grown up, going to be a looker!
The rest of the military got dragged down into the muck across the 1990s and they developed this very derisive term to describe it: military operations other than war.
I ask you, who joins the military to do things other than war?
Actually, most of them.
Jessica Lynch never planned on shooting back.
Most of them don't pick up a rifle.
I maintain this is code inside the Army for, "We don't want to do this."
They spent the 1990s working the messy scene between globalized parts of the world What I call the core and the gap.
The Clinton administration wasn't interested in running this.
For eight years, after screwing up the relationship on day one -- inauguration day with gays in the military -- which was deft.
So we were home alone for eight years.
And what did we do home alone?
We bought one military and we operated another.
It's like the guy who goes to the doctor and says, "Doctor, it hurts when I do this."
The doctor says, "Stop doing that you idiot."
I used to give this brief inside the Pentagon in the early 1990s.
I'd say, "You're buying one military and you're operating another, and eventually it's going to hurt. It's wrong.
Bad Pentagon, bad!"
And they'd say, "Dr. Barnett, you are so right.
Can you come back next year and remind us again?"
Some people say 9/11 heals the rift -- jerks the long-term transformation gurus out of their 30,000 foot view of history, drags them down in to the muck and says, "You want a networked opponent?
I've got one, he's everywhere, go find him."
It elevates MOOTW -- how we pronounce that acronym -- from crap to grand strategy, because that's how you're going to shrink that gap.
Some people put these two things together and they call it empire, which I think is a boneheaded concept.
Empire is about the enforcement of not just minimal rule sets, which you cannot do, but maximum rule sets which you must do.
It's not our system of governance.
Never how we've sought to interact with the outside world.
I prefer that phrase System Administration.
We enforce the minimal rule sets for maintaining connectivity to the global economy.
Certain bad things you cannot do.
How this impacts the way we think about the future of war.
This is a concept which gets me vilified throughout the Pentagon.
It makes me very popular as well.
Everybody's got an opinion.
Going back to the beginning of our country -- historically, defenses meant protection of the homeland.
Security has meant everything else.
Written into our constitution, two different forces, two different functions.
Raise an army when you need it, and maintain a navy for day-to-day connectivity.
A Department of War, a Department of Everything Else.
A big stick, a baton stick.
Can of whup ass, the networking force.
In 1947 we merged these two things together in the Defense Department.
Our long-term rationale becomes, we're involved in a hair trigger stand off with the Soviets.
To attack America is to risk blowing up the world.
We connected national security to international security with about a seven minute time delay.
That's not our problem now.
They can kill three million in Chicago tomorrow and we don't go to the mattresses with nukes.
That's the scary part.
The question is how do we reconnect American national security with global security to make the world a lot more comfortable, and to embed and contextualize our employment of force around the planet?
What's happened since is that bifurcation I described.
to the end of the Cold War.
Let's have a Department of War, and a Department of Something Else.
Some people say, "Hell, 9/11 did it for you."
Now we've got a home game and an away game.
The Department of Homeland Security is a strategic feel good measure.
It's going to be the Department of Agriculture for the 21st century.
TSA -- thousands standing around.
I supported the war in Iraq.
He was a bad guy with multiple priors.
It's not like we had to find him actually killing somebody live to arrest him.
I knew we'd kick ass in the war with the Leviathan Force.
I knew we'd have a hard time with what followed.
But I know this organization doesn't change until it experiences failure.
What do I mean by these two different forces?
This is the Hobbesian Force.
That plus nukes rules out great power war.
This is the military the rest of the world wants us to build.
It's why I travel all over the world talking to foreign militaries.
What does this mean?
It means you've got to stop pretending you can do these two very disparate skill sets with the same 19-year-old.
Switching back, morning, afternoon, evening, morning, afternoon, evening.
Handing out aid, shooting back, handing out aid, shooting back.
It's too much.
The 19-year-olds get tired from the switching, OK?
That force on the left, you can train a 19-year-old to do that.
That force on the right is more like a 40-year-old cop.
You need the experience.
What does this mean in terms of operations?
The rule is going to be this.
That Sys Admin force is the force that never comes home, does most of your work.
You break out that Leviathan Force only every so often.
But here's the promise you make to the American public, to your own people, to the world.
You break out that Leviathan Force, you promise, you guarantee that you're going to mount one hell of a -- immediately -- follow-on Sys Admin effort.
Don't plan for the war unless you plan to win the peace.
Other differences. Leviathan traditional partners, they all look like the Brits and their former colonies.
Including us, I would remind you.
The rest -- wider array of partners.
International organizations, non-governmental organizations, private voluntary organizations, contractors.
You're not going to get away from that.
Leviathan Force, it's all about joint operations between the military services.
We're done with that.
What we need to do is inter-agency operations, which frankly Condi Rice was in charge of.
And I'm amazed nobody asked her that question when she was confirmed.
I call the Leviathan Force your dad's military.
I like them young, male, unmarried, slightly pissed off.
I call the Sys Admin Force your mom's military.
It's everything the man's military hates.
Gender balanced much more, older, educated, married with children.
The force on the left, up or out.
The force on the right, in and out.
The force on the left respects Posse Comitatus restrictions on the use of force inside the U.S.
The force on the right's going to obliterate it.
That's where the National Guard's going to be.
of the International Criminal Court.
Sys Admin Force has to.
Different definitions of network centricity.
One takes down networks, one puts them up.
And you've got to wage war here in such a way to facilitate that.
Do we need a bigger budget?
Do we need a draft to pull this off?
Absolutely not.
I've been told by the Revolution of Military Affairs crowd for years, we can do it faster, cheaper, smaller, just as lethal.
I say, "Great, I'm going to take the Sys Admin budget out of your hide."
Here's the larger point.
You're going to build the Sys Admin Force inside the U.S. Military first.
But ultimately you're going to civilianize it, probably two thirds.
Inter agency-ize it, internationalize it.
So yes, it begins inside the Pentagon, but over time it's going to cross that river.
I have been to the mountain top. I can see the future.
I may not live long enough to get you there, but it's going to happen.
We're going to have a Department of Something Else between war and peace.
Last slide.
Who gets custody of the kids?
This is where the Marines in the audience get kind of tense.
And this is when they think about beating the crap out of me after the talk.
Read Max Boon.
This is the history of the marines -- small wars, small arms.
The Marines are like my West Highland Terrier.
They get up every morning, they want to dig a hole and they want to kill something.
I don't want my Marines handing out aid.
I want them to be Marines.
That's what keeps the Sys Admin Force from being a pussy force.
It keeps it from being the U.N.
You shoot at these people the Marines are going to come over and kill you.
Department of Navy, strategic subs go this way, surface combatants are over there, and the news is they may actually be that small.
I call it the Smart Dust Navy.
I tell young officers, "You may command 500 ships in your career.
Bad news is they may not have anybody on them."
Carriers go both ways because they're a swing asset.
You'll see the pattern -- airborne, just like carriers.
Armor goes this way.
Here's the dirty secret of the Air Force, you can win by bombing.
But you need lots of these guys on the ground to win the peace.
Shinseki was right with the argument.
Air force, strategic airlift goes both ways.
Bombers, fighters go over here.
Special Operations Command down at Tampa.
Trigger-pullers go this way.
Civil Affairs, that bastard child, comes over here.
Return to the Army.
The point about the trigger-pullers and Special Operations Command.
No off season, these guys are always active.
They drop in, do their business, disappear.
See me now. Don't talk about it later.
I was never here.
The world is my playground.
I want to keep trigger-pullers trigger-happy.
I want the rules to be as loose as possible.
Because when the thing gets prevented in Chicago with the three million dead that perverts our political system beyond all recognition, these are the guys who are going to kill them first.
So it's better off to have them make some mistakes along the way than to see that.
Reserve component -- National Guard reserves overwhelmingly Sys Admin.
How are you going to get them to work for this force?
Most firemen in this country do it for free.
This is not about money.
This is about being up front with these guys and gals.
Last point, intelligence community -- the muscle and the defense agencies go this way.
What should be the CIA, open, analytical, open source should come over here.
The information you need to do this is not secret.
It's not secret.
Read that great piece in the New Yorker about how our echo boomers, 19 to 25, over in Iraq taught each other how to do Sys Admin work, over the Internet in chat rooms.
They said, "Al Qaeda could be listening."
They said, "Well, Jesus, they already know this stuff."
Take a gift in the left hand.
These are the sunglasses that don't scare people, simple stuff.
Censors and transparency, the overheads go in both directions.
Thanks.
A fact came out of MIT, couple of years ago. Ken Hale, who's a linguist, said that of the 6,000 languages spoken on Earth right now, 3,000 aren't spoken by the children.
So that in one generation, we're going to halve our cultural diversity.
He went on to say that every two weeks, an elder goes to the grave carrying the last spoken word of that culture.
So an entire philosophy, a body of knowledge about the natural world that had been empirically gleaned over centuries, goes away.
And this happens every two weeks.
So for the last 20 years, since my dental experience, I have been traveling the world and coming back with stories about some of these people.
What I'd like to do right now is share some of those stories with you.
This is Tamdin.
She is a 69-year-old nun.
She was thrown in prison in Tibet for two years for putting up a little tiny placard protesting the occupation of her country.
And when I met her, she had just taken a walk over the Himalayas from Lhasa, the capital of Tibet, into Nepal, across to India -- 30 days -- to meet her leader, the Dalai Lama.
The Dalai Lama lives in Dharamsala, India.
So I took this picture three days after she arrived, and she had this beat-up pair of tennis shoes on, with her toes sticking out.
And she crossed in March, and there's a lot of snow at 18,500 feet in March.
This is Paldin.